EDITORS' PREFACE 

Process and Reality, Whitehead's magnum opus, is one of the major 
philosophical works of the modern world, and an extensive body of sec- 
ondary literature has developed around it. Yet surely no significant philo- 
sophical book has appeared in the last two centuries in nearly so deplorable 
a condition as has this one, with its many hundreds of errors and with 
over three hundred discrepancies between the American (Macmillan) and 
the English (Cambridge) editions, which appeared in different formats 
with divergent paginations. The work itself is highly technical and far from 
easy to understand, and in many passages the errors in those editions were 
such as to compound the difficulties. The need for a corrected edition has 
been keenly felt for many decades. 

The principles to be used in deciding what sorts of corrections ought to 
be introduced into a new edition of Process and Reality are not, however, 
immediately obvious. Settling upon these principles requires that one take 
into account the attitude toward book production exhibited by White- 
head, the probable history of the production of this volume, and the two 
original editions of the text as they compare with each other and with 
other books by Whitehead. We will discuss these various factors to provide 
background in terms of which the reader can understand the rationale for 
the editorial decisions we have made. 

Whitehead did not spend much of his own time on the routine tasks 
associated with book production. Professor Raphael Demos was a young 
colleague of Whitehead on the Harvard faculty at the time, 1925, of the 
publication of Science and the Modern World. Demos worked over the 
manuscript editorially, read the proofs, and did the Index for that volume. 
The final sentence of Whitehead's Preface reads: "My most grateful 
thanks are due to my colleague Mr. Raphael Demos for reading the proofs 
and for the suggestion of many improvements in expression." After re- 
tiring from Harvard in the early 1960's, Demos became for four years a 
colleague at Vanderbilt University of Professor Sherburne and shared with 
him his personal observations concerning Whitehead's indifference to the 
production process. 

Bertrand Russell x provides further evidence of Whitehead's sense of 
priorities when he reports that Whitehead, in response to Russell's com- 

1 Portraits from Memory (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1956), p. 104. 



vi Editors' Preface 

plaint that he had not answered a letter, "justified himself by saying that 
if he answered letters, he would have no time for original work/' Russell 
found this justification "complete and unanswerable/' 

In 1929, when Process and Reality was in production, the same sense of 
priorities was operative. Whitehead was sixty-eight years old, and he still 
had major projects maturing in his mind: Adventures of Ideas, Modes of 
Thought, and numerous articles and lectures were still to come. "Original 
work," fortunately, continued to take precedence in his life over humdrum 
details and trivia. Unfortunately, however, 1929 found Demos in England 
(working with Russell). As best we can determine at this time, no one 
with both a familiarity with Whitehead's thought and an eye for detail 
undertook to shepherd Process and Reality through the production process 
—Demos, in particular, was never aware that anyone else from the philo- 
sophical community had worked on the manuscript or proofs. Whitehead's 
only personal acknowledgment in the Preface is to "the constant encourage- 
ment and counsel which I owe to my wife." 

An examination of the available evidence, including the discrepancies 
between the two original editions and the types of errors they contained, 
has led us to the following reconstruction of the production process and of 
the origin of some of the types of errors. 

First, to some extent in conjunction with the preparation of his Gifford 
Lectures and to some extent as an expansion and revision of them, 2 White- 
head prepared a hand-written manuscript. Many of the errors in the final 
product, such as incorrect references, misquoted poetry, other faulty quo- 
tations, faulty and inconsistent punctuation, and some of the wrong and 
missing words, surely originated at this stage and were due to Whitehead's 
lack of attention to details. In addition, the inconsistencies in formal mat- 
ters were undoubtedly due in part to the fact that the manuscript was 
quite lengthy and was written over a period of at least a year and a half. 

Second, a typist (possibly at Macmillan) prepared a typed copy for the 
printer. The errors that crept into the manuscript at this stage seem to in- 
clude, besides the usual sorts of typographical errors, misreadings of White- 
head's somewhat difficult hand. 3 For example, the flourish initiating 
Whitehead's capital "H" was sometimes transcribed as a "T," so that 
"His" came out "This," and "Here" came out "There." Also, not only the 
regular mistranscription of "Monadology" as "MonodoZogy," but also 
other mistranscriptions, such as "transmuted" for "transmitted" and 
"goal" for "goad," probably occurred at this stage. (Professor Victor Lowe 

2 See Victor Lowe, "Whitehead's Gifford Lectures/' The Southern journal of 
Philosophy, Vol. 1, No. 4 (Winter, 1969-70), 329-38. 

3 For samples of his handwriting, see the letters published in Alfred North 
Whitehead: Essays on His Philosophy, ed. George L. Kline (New York: Pren- 
tice-Hall, 1963), p. 197; and The Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead, ed. 
Paul Arthur Schilpp, 2nd ed. (New York: Tudor Publishing, 1951), pp. 664- 
65. 



Editors' Preface vii 

has reported an incident which, whether or not it involved a misreading of 
Whitehead's handwriting, provided— as Lowe says— a bad omen for what 
would happen to the book: "On April 11, 1928, Kemp Smith received this 
cable from Whitehead: title gifford lectures is process and reality 

SYLLOBUS FOLLOWING SHORTLY BY MAIL WHITCHCAD." 4 ) 

Third, it appears that Macmillan set type first and that Cambridge set 
its edition a bit later, using either a copy of the typed manuscript or, more 
likely, a copy of Macmillan's proof sheets. There are a large number of 
errors which the two editions had in common, a large number in the Mac- 
millan edition which were not in the Cambridge edition, and some few in 
the latter which were not in the former. Their distribution and their char- 
acter suggest the following observations : Macmillan provided poor proof- 
reading; the Cambridge editor did a much more rigorous job of catching 
typographical errors; the Cambridge editor also initiated certain sorts of 
editorial changes, which primarily involved punctuation, though these were 
not consistently applied throughout the entire text; finally, the types of 
errors unique to the Cambridge edition seem not to be due to carelessness, 
but to deliberate attempts to make the text more intelligible— attempts 
which fell short of their goal because the Cambridge editor did not under- 
stand Whitehead's technical concepts. 

There is independent evidence that Whitehead himself saw proofs. 
Lowe has published a letter from Whitehead to his son, dated August 12, 
1929, which reads in part: "At last I have got through with my Gifford 
Lectures — final proofs corrected, Index Printed, and the last corrections 
put in/' 5 The deplorable state of the text, plus Whitehead's lack of 
enthusiasm for this sort of work, make it virtually certain that he did not 
do much careful proofreading, Lowe reports 6 that Whitehead, after dis- 
cussions with C. I. Lewis, decided to change the adjectival form of "cate- 
gory" from "categorical" to "categoreal" and made this change throughout 
the galleys. We strongly suspect that Whitehead's work on the proofs was 
limited for the most part to very particular, specific corrections of this sort. 

It would have been useful in the preparation of this corrected edition to 
have had Whitehead's manuscript and/or typescript. Unfortunately, all 
efforts to locate them have been unsuccessful— both are probably no longer 
extant. We do have some corrections, additions, and marginalia which 
Whitehead himself added to his Cambridge and Macmillan copies. In 
addition there is a one-page list entitled "Misprints" (evidently given to 
Whitehead by someone else) with an endorsement in Whitehead's hand- 
writing: "Corrections all inserted." This data was given to us by Lowe, 
who is writing the authorized biography of Whitehead and has been given 
access to family materials, and to whom we express our deep appreciation. 

4 Lowe, op. cii. y 334, fn. 14. 

*Ibid., 338. 

Q Ibid., fn. 19; as Lowe reports, he received this information from H. N. Lee. 



viii Editors' Preface 

Finally, in 1966 Lowe was allowed by Mrs. Henry Copley Greene to see a 
typescript of Part V, which was inscribed: "Rosalind Greene with his love 
From Alfred Whitehead Oct. 12, 1928." This typescript had some correc- 
tions in Whitehead's hand on it; Lowe reports that, with one exception, 
the published texts contained these corrections (e.g., the capitalization of 
'Creature' and 'Itself' in the last paragraph). 

It was on the basis of the above evidence and interpretations that we 
arrived at the principles that guided our editorial work in regard to both 
the more trivial and the more significant issues. 

The most difficult and debatable editorial decisions had to be made, 
ironically, concerning relatively trivial matters, especially those involving 
punctuation. We tried to steer a middle course between two unacceptable 
extremes. 

On the one hand, the editors of a "corrected edition" might have intro- 
duced into the text all the changes which they would have suggested to a 
still-living author. The obvious problem with this alternative is that, since 
the author is no longer living, he would have no chance to veto these "im- 
provements" as being inconsistent with his own meaning or stylistic prefer- 
ences. 

On the other hand, to avoid this problem the editors might have decided 
to remove only the most obvious and egregious errors, otherwise leaving 
the text as it was. One problem with this alternative is that this important 
work would again be published without benefit of the kind of careful edi- 
torial work Whitehead had every right to expect— work which the Cam- 
bridge editor began but did not carry out consistently. Another problem is 
that there are over three hundred divergencies between the two original 
editions. In these places it is impossible simply to leave the text as it was— 
a choice must be made. And clearly, in most of these places the Cambridge 
punctuation is preferable and must be followed— it would be totally irre- 
sponsible to revert to Macmillan's punctuation. But once Cambridge's 
punctuation has been followed in these places, the question arises, How 
could one justify accepting Cambridge's improvements in these instances 
and yet not make similar improvements in parallel passages? 

Accordingly, in trying to steer a middle course between these two ex- 
tremes we decided that the most responsible plan of action would be to 
take the changes introduced bv the Cambridge editor (which, of course, 
were made during Whitehead's life-time and could have been vetoed in his 
personal copies) as precedents for the kinds of changes to be carried out 
consistently. A prime example is provided by the fact that Cambridge 
deleted many, but not all, of the commas which often appeared between 
the subject and the verb in Macmillan. However, we left some other ques- 
tionable practices (e.g., the frequent use of a semicolon where grammatical 
rules would call for a comma) as they were, primarily because Cambridge 
did not provide sufficient precedents for changes, even though we would 



Editors' Preface ix 

ourselves have suggested changes to Whitehead had we been editing this 
book in 1929, 

Working within these guidelines, the editors have sought to produce a 
text that is free not only of the hundreds of blatant errors found in the 
original, especially in the Macmillan edition, but also free of many of the 
minor sorts of inconsistencies recognized and addressed to some extent by 
the Cambridge editor. 

It is in the matter of the more significant corrections involving word 
changes that editors must guard against the possibility that interpretative 
bias might lead to textual distortions. There were three factors which 
helped us guard against this possibility. First, we drew heavily upon a sub- 
stantial amount of previous work, coordinated by Sherburne, in which the 
suggested corrigenda lists of six scholars were collated and then circulated 
among eight scholars for opinions and observations. The publication of the 
results of these discussions, 7 plus the lengthy discussions that preceded and 
followed it, have established a consensus view about many items which 
provided guidance. Second, in their own work the two editors approach 
Whitehead's thought from different perspectives and focus their work 
around different sorts of interests. Third, we used the principle that no 
changes would be introduced into the text unless they were endorsed by 
both editors. 

We note, finally, that there can be no purely mechanical guidelines to 
guarantee objectivity and prevent distortion. Ultimately, editors must rely 
upon their own judgment, their knowledge of their texts, and their com- 
mon sense. Recognizing this, we accept full responsibility for the decisions 
we have made. 

Besides the issues discussed above, there were other editorial decisions 
to be made. There were substantial differences of format between the two 
original editions. Cambridge had a detailed Table of Contents at the be- 
ginning of the book, whereas Macmillan had only a brief listing of major 
divisions at the beginning with the detailed materials spread throughout 
the book as "Abstracts" prior to each of the five major Parts of the volume. 
Primarily because it is a nuisance to locate the various sections of this 
analytic Table of Contents in Macmillan, we have followed Cambridge in 
this matter. We have also followed the Cambridge edition in setting off 
some quotations and have let it guide us in regard to the question as to 
which quotations to set off (the Macmillan edition did not even set off 
page-length items). 

Since most of the secondary literature on Process and Reality gives page 
references to the Macmillan edition, we considered very seriously the pos- 
sibility of retaining its pagination in this new edition. For several technical 

7 Donald W, Sherburne, "Corrigenda for Process and Reality" in Kline, ed., 
op. cit, pp. 200-207. 



x Editors' Preface 

reasons this proved impractical. Consequently, we have inserted in this 
text, in brackets, the page numbers of the Macmillan edition, except in the 
Table of Contents. 

In regard to certain minor differences between the texts, some of which 
reflect American vs. British conventions, we have followed Macmillan. 
Examples are putting periods and commas inside the quotation marks, 
numbering the footnotes consecutively within each chapter rather than on 
each page, and writing "Section" instead of using the symbol "$." 

Except for those matters, which simply reflect different conventions, we 
have left a record of all of the changes which we have made. That is, in the 
Editors' Notes at the back of the book we have indicated all the diver- 
gencies (or, in a few cases, types of divergencies) from both original edi- 
tions, no matter how trivial, thereby giving interested scholars access to 
both previous readings through this corrected edition. We have indicated 
in the text, by means of single and double obelisks ( f and i ) , the places 
where these divergencies occur. The more exact meaning of these symbols, 
plus that of the single and double asterisks, is explained in the introductory 
statement to the Editors' Notes. 

The original editions had woefully inadequate Indexes. For this volume, 
Griffin has prepared a totally new, enormously expanded Index. Sincere 
thanks are due to Professor Marjorie Suchocki, who correlated the Index 
items to the pagination in this new edition, and to Professor Bernard M. 
Loomer, who many years ago prepared an expanded Index which was made 
available to other scholars. 

One other edition of Process and Reality has appeared which has not yet 
been mentioned. In 1969, The Free Press published a paperback edition. 
It should in no way be confused with the present corrected edition, pub- 
lished by the same company. The 1969 edition did not incorporate the 
corrigenda which had been published by Sherburne; it added some new- 
errors of its own; it introduced yet another pagination without indicating 
the previous standard pagination; and it did not contain a new Index. We 
wish to commend The Free Press for now publishing this corrected edition. 

We acknowledge most gratefully the support of the Vanderbilt Uni- 
versity Research Council, which provided Sherburne with travel funds and 
released time to work on this project. We are also deeply indebted to the 
Center for Process Studies, which has supported this project extensively, 
and in turn to both the Claremont Graduate School and the School of 
Theology at Claremont, which give support to the Center. Finally, we 
express our warm appreciation to Rebecca Parker Beyer, who was a great 
help in comparing texts and reading proofs. 

David Ray Griffin 
Center for Process Studies 

Donald W. Sherburne 
Vanderbilt University 


