
PREFACE 

[v]* These lectures are based upon a recurrence to that phase of philo- 
sophic thought which began with Descartes and ended with Hume. The 
philosophic scheme which they endeavour to explain is termed the 'Phi- 
losophy of Organism/ There is no doctrine put forward which cannot cite 
in its defence some explicit statement of one of this group of thinkers, 
or of one of the two founders of all Western thought, Plato and Aristotle. 
But the philosophy of organism is apt to emphasize just those elements 
in the writings of these masters which subsequent systematizers have put 
aside. The writer who most fully anticipated the main positions of the 
philosophy of organism is John Locke in his Essay, especially x in its later 
books. 

The lectures are divided into five parts. In the first part, the method is 
explained, and thet scheme of ideas, in terms of which the cosmology is to 
be framed, is stated summarily. 

In the second part,* an endeavour is made to exhibit this scheme as ade- 
quate for the interpretation of the ideas and problems which form the 
complex texture of civilized thought. Apart from such an investigation the 
summary statement of Part I is practically unintelligible. Thus Part II at 
once gives meaning to the verbal phrases of the scheme by their use in 
discussion, and shows the power of the scheme to put the various elements 
of our experience into a consistent relation to each other. In order to ob- 
tain a reasonably complete account of human experience considered in 
relation to the philosophical [vi\ problems which naturally arise, the group 
of philosophers and scientists belonging to the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries has been considered, in particular Descartes, Newton, Locke, 
Hume, Kant. Any one of these writers is one-sided in his presentation of 
the groundwork of experience; but as a whole they give a general presenta- 
tion which dominates the development of subsequent philosophy. I started 
the investigation with the expectation of being occupied with the exposi- 
tion of the divergencies from every member of this group. But a careful 
examination of their exact statements disclosed that in the main the 
philosophy of organism is a recurrence to pre-Kantian modes of thought. 
These philosophers were perplexed by the inconsistent presuppositions 
underlying their inherited modes of expression. In so far as they, or their 

1 Cf. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Bk. IV, Ch. VI, Sect. 11.* 

xi 



xii Preface 

successors, have endeavoured to be rigidly systematic, the tendency has 
been to abandon just those elements in their thought upon which the 
philosophy of organism bases itself. An endeavour has been made to point 
out the exact points of agreement and of disagreement. 

In the second part, the discussions of modern thought have been con- 
fined to the most general notions of physics and biology, with a careful 
avoidance of all detail. Also, it must be one of the motives of a complete 
cosmology to construct a system of ideas which brings t the aesthetic, 
moral, and religious interests into relation with those concepts of the 
world which have their origin in natural science. 

In the third and fourth parts, the cosmological scheme is developed in 
terms of its own categoreal notions, and without much regard to other 
systems of thought. For example, in Part II there is a chapter on the 
'Extensive Continuum/ which is largely concerned with the notions of 
Descartes and Newton, compared with the way in which the organic phi- 
losophy must interpret this feature of the world. But in Part IV, this ques- 
tion is treated from the point of view of developing the detailed method 
[viz] in which the philosophy of organism establishes the theory of this 
problem. It must be thoroughly understood that the theme of these lec- 
tures is not a detached consideration of various traditional philosophical 
problems which acquire urgency in certain traditional systems of thought. 
The lectures are intended to state a condensed scheme of cosmological 
ideas, to develop their meaning by confrontation with the various topics 
of experience, and finally to elaborate an adequate cosmology in terms of 
which all particular topics find theirt interconnections. Thus the unity 
of treatment is to be looked for in the gradual development of the scheme, 
in meaning and in relevance, and not in the successive treatment of par- 
ticular topics. For example, the doctrines of time, of space, of perception, 
and of causality are recurred to again and again, as the cosmology de- 
velops. In each recurrence, these topics throw some new light on the 
scheme, or receive some new elucidation. At the end, in so far as the enter- 
prise has been successful, there should be no problem of space-time, or 
of epistemology, or of causality, left over for discussion. The scheme should 
have developed all those generic notions adequate for the expression of any 
possible interconnection of things. 

Among the contemporary schools of thought, my obligations to the 
English and American Realists are obvious. In this connection, I should 
like especially to mention Professor T. P. Nunn, of the University of 
London. His anticipations, in the Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, of 
some of the doctrines of recent Realism, do not appear to be sufficiently 
well known. 

I am also greatly indebted to Bergson, William James, and John Dewey. 
One of my preoccupations has been to rescue their type of thought from 
the charge of anti-intellectualism, which rightly or wrongly has been asso- 
ciated with it. Finally, though throughout the main body of the work I 



Preface xiii 

am in sharp disagreement with Bradley, the final outcome is after all not 
so greatly different. I am particularly indebted to his chapter on the nature 
[viii] of experience, which appears in his Essays on Truth and Reality. 
His insistence on 'feeling' is very consonant with my own conclusions. 
This whole metaphysical position is an implicit repudiation of the doctrine 
of Vacuous actuality/ 

The fifth part is concerned with the final interpretation of the ultimate 
way in which the cosmological problem is to be conceived. It answers the 
question, What does it all come to? In this part, the approximation to 
Bradley is evident. Indeed, if this cosmology be deemed successful, it be- 
comes natural at this point to ask whether the type of thought involved 
be not a transformation of some main doctrines of Absolute Idealism onto 
a realistic basis. 

These lectures will be best understood by noting the following list of 
prevalent habits of thought, which are repudiated, in so far as concerns 
their influence on philosophy: 

(i) The distrust of speculative philosophy. 

(ii) The trust in language as an adequate expression of propositions. 

(iii) The mode of philosophical thought which implies, and is implied 
by, the faculty-psychology. 

(iv) The subject-predicate form of expression. 

(v) The sensationalist doctrine of perception. 

(vi) The doctrine of vacuous actuality. 

(vii) The Kantian doctrine of the objective world as a theoretical con- 
struct from purely subjective experience. 

(viii) Arbitrary deductions in ex absurdo arguments. 

(ix) Belief that logical inconsistencies can indicate anything else than 
some antecedent errors. 

By reason of its ready acceptance of some, or all. of these nine myths 
and fallacious procedures, much nineteenth-century philosophy excludes 
itself from relevance to the ordinary stubborn facts of daily life. 

The positive doctrine of these lectures is concerned with the becoming, 
the being, and the relatedness of 'actual entities/ An "actual entity' is a 
res vera in the [ix] Cartesian sense of that term; 2 it is a Cartesian 'sub- 
stance/ and not an Aristotelian 'primary substance/ But Descartes re- 
tained in his metaphysical doctrine the Aristotelian dominance of the 
category of 'quality' over that of 'relatedness/ In these lectures 'relatedness' 
is dominant over 'quality/ All relatedness has its foundation in the re- 
latedness of actualities; and such relatedness is wholly concerned with the 
appropriation of the dead by the living— that is to say, with 'objective im- 
mortality' whereby what is divested of its own living immediacy becomes 

2 1 derive my comprehension of this element in Descartes' thought from Pro- 
fessor Gilson of the Sorbonne. I believe that he is the first to insist on its im- 
portance. He is, of course, not responsible for the use made of the notion in 
these lectures. 



xiv Preface 

a real component in other living immediacies of becoming. This is the 
doctrine that the creative advance of the world is the becoming, the perish- 
ing, and the objective immortalities of those things which jointly con- 
stitute stubborn fact 

The history of philosophy discloses two cosmologies which at different 
periods have dominated European thought, Plato's Timaeus, 3 and the 
cosmology of the seventeenth century, whose chief authors were Galileo, 
Descartes, Newton, Locke. In attempting an enterprise of the same kind, 
it is wise to follow the clue that perhaps the true solution consists in a 
fusion of the two previous schemes, with modifications demanded by self- 
consistency and the advance of knowledge. The cosmology explained in 
these lectures has been framed in accordance with this reliance on the 
positive value of the philosophical tradition. One test of success is ade- 
quacy in the comprehension of the variety of experience within the limits 
of one scheme of ideas. The endeavour to satisfy this condition is illus- 
trated by comparing Chapters III, VII, and X of Part II, respectively 
entitled The Order of Nature/ The Subjectivist Principle/ and Trocess/ 
with Chapter [x] V of Part III, entitled The Higher Phases of Experience/ 
and with Chapter V of Part IV, entitled 'Measurement/ and with Chap- 
ter II of Part V. entitled 'God and thet World/ These chapters should 
be recognizable as the legitimate outcome of the one scheme of ideas 
stated in the second chapter of Part I. 

In these lectures I have endeavoured to compress the material derived 
from years of meditation. In putting out these results, four strong impres- 
sions dominate my mind: First, that the movement of historical, and 
philosophical, criticism of detached questions, which on the whole has 
dominated the last two centuries, has done its work, and requires to be 
supplemented by a more sustained effort of constructive thought. Sec- 
ondly, that the true method of philosophical construction is to frame a 
scheme of ideas, the best that one can, and unflinchingly to explore the 
interpretation of experience in terms of that scheme. Thirdly, that all 
constructive thought, on the various special topics of scientific interest, is 
dominated by some such scheme, unacknowledged, but no less influential 
in guiding the imagination. The importance of philosophy lies in its 
sustained effort to make such schemes explicit, and thereby capable of 
criticism and improvement. 

There remains the final reflection, how shallow, puny, and imperfect are 
efforts to sound the depths in the nature of things. In philosophical dis- 
cussion, the merest hint of dogmatic certainty as to finality of statement 
is an exhibition of folly. 

In the expansion of these lectures to the dimensions of the present book, 

3 1 regret that Professor A. E. Taylor's Commentary on Plato's Timaeus was 
only published after this work was prepared for the press. Thus, with the excep- 
tion of one small reference, no use could be made of it. I am very greatly in- 
debted to Professor Taylor's other writings. 



Preface xv 

I have been greatly indebted to the critical difficulties suggested by the 
members of my Harvard classes. Also this work would never have been 
written without the constant encouragement and counsel which I owe to 
my wife. 

A. N. W. 
Harvard University 
January, 1929 


