
CONTENTS 

Editors' Preface v 

Preface xi 



PART I 
THE SPECULATIVE SCHEME 

Chapter I. Speculative Philosophy 



SECTION 

I. Speculative Philosophy; Coherent, Logical, Necessary System 

of Ideas; Interpretation of Experience. 
II. Defects of Insight and of Language; Conditions for Observa- 
tion; Rigid Empiricism, Imagination, Generalization; Co- 
herence and Incoherence; Creativity, the Ultimate. 

III. Rationalism and Dogmatism; Scheme as a Matrix, False and 

True Propositions, Use of the Matrix; Experimental Adven- 
ture. 

IV. Philosophy and Science, Grades of Generality; Dogmatic Influ- 

ence of Mathematics; Progress of Philosophy. 
V. Defects of Language; Propositions and Their Background; 
Metaphysical Presupposition; Excessive Trust in Language; 
Metaphysics and Practice; Metaphysics and Linguistic Ex- 
pression. 
VI. Speculative Philosophy and Overambition; Overambition, 
Dogmatism and Progress; Interpretation and Metaphysics; 
The Higher Elements of Experience, Subjectivity and the 
Metaphysical Correction; Morality, Religion, Science, Con- 
nected by Philosophy; Contrast between + Religion and Sci- 
ence; Conclusion. 

Chapter II. The Categoreal Scheme 18 

SECTION 

I. Four Notions, namely, Actual Entity, Prehension, Nexus, the 
Ontological Principle; Descartes and Locke; Philosophy 
Explanatory of Abstraction, Not of Concreteness. 
II. The Four Sets of Categories; The Category of the Ultimate; 

II. Conjunction and Disjunction; Creativity, the Principle of 
Novelty, Creative Advance; Togetherness, Concrescence; 
Eight Categories of Existence; Twenty-Seven Categories of 
Explanation. 

III. Nine Categoreal Obligations. 

IV. Preliminary Notes; Complete Abstraction Self-Contradictory; 

Principles of Unrest and of Relativity; Actual Entities never 
Change; Perishing of Occasions and Their Objective Im- 
mortality; Final Causation and Efficient Causation; Mul- 
tiplicities; Substance. 

Chapter III. Some Derivative Notions 31 

I. Primordial Nature of God; Relevance, the Divine Ordering; 
Consequent Nature of God; Creativity and Its Acquirement 
of Character; Creatures, Objective Immortality, Appetition, 
Novelty, Relevance; Appetition and Mentality, Conceptual 
Prehensions, Pure and Impure Prehensions; Synonyms and 
Analogies, namely, t Conceptual Prehension, Appetition, In- 
tuition, Physical Purpose, Vision, Envisagement. 
II. Social Order, Defining Characteristic, Substantial Form; Per- 
sonal Order, Serial Inheritance, Enduring Object; Corpus- 
cular Societies. 

III. Classic Notion of Time, Unique Seriality; Continuity of Be- 

coming, Becoming of Continuity, Zeno; Atomism and Con- 
tinuity; Corpuscular and Wave Theories of Light. 

IV. Consciousness, Thought, Sense-Perception are Unessential Ele- 

ments in an Instance of Experience. 



PART II 
DISCUSSIONS AND APPLICATIONS 

Chapter I. Fact and Form 39 

I. Appeal to Facts, European Tradition; Plato, Aristotle, Des- 
cartes, Locke, Hume, Kant; Intrinsic Reasonableness; Foot- 
notes to Plato; This Cosmology Platonic; Participating 
Forms; Divine Ordering; Ontological Principle; Facts the 
only Reasons; Facts are Process; Prehension, Satisfaction. 
II. Rationalism a Faith, Adventure of Hope; Limits of Theory, 
Givenness,t Professor A. E. Taylor on Plato; Decision, the 


II. Ontological Principle; Entities and Process, Actual Entities 
and Decision; Stubborn Fact. 

III. Platonic Form 7 Idea, Essence, Eternal Object; Potentiality and 

Givenness; Exclusiveness of the Given; Subject-Superject, 
Becoming and Being; Evaporation of Indeterrnination in 
Concrescence, Satisfaction Determinate and Exclusive; Con- 
crescence Dipolar; Potentiality, Givenness, Impossibility; 
Subsistence. 

IV. Actual Occasions Internally Determined,! Externally Free; 

Course of History not Necessary, No Perfection; Efficient 
Causation and Final Reaction; God's Primordial Freedom; 
Each Concrescence between Definite Free Initiation and 
Definite Free Conclusion, the Former Macrocosmic, the 
Latter Microcosmic. 

V. Universals and Particulars, Unsuitable Terms with False Im- 
plication; Illustration from Descartes, also Hume; Des- 
cartes' Alternative Doctrine, Realitas Objective, Inspectio, 
Intuitio, Judicium; World not Describable in Terms of Sub- 
ject and Predicate. Substance and Quality, Particular and 
Universal; Universal Relativity. 

VI. Locke's Essay ,t Agreement of Organic Philosophy with It; Sub- 
stitute 'Experience 7 for 'Understanding'; Ideas and Prehen- 
sions; Locke's Two Doctrines of Ideas, Ideas of Particular 
Things; Representative Theory of Perception; Logical Sim- 
plicity and Genetic Priority not to be Identified; Substance, 
Exterior Things, Societies; Solidarity of the Universe. 

VII. Locke's Doctrine of Power, Power and Substance; Causal 
Objectification and Presentational Objectification; Change 
Means Adventures of Eternal Objects; Real Essence, 
Abstract Essence; Doctrine of Organism and Generation of 
Actual Entities. 

Chapter II. The Extensive Continuum 61 

I. Continuum and Real Potentiality, Atomized by Actual Occa- 
sions; How the Continuum is Experienced, Presentational 
Immediacy, Sensa; Real Chair and Chair-Image; Complex 
Ingression of Sensa. 

II. General Potentiality and Pxeal Potentiality; Standpoints of 
Actual Occasions, Determined by Initial Phase of Subjective 
Aim; Extensive Relationships; The Epochal Theory of 
Time, Zeno, William James. 

III. Newton's Scholium, 


IV. Newton's Scholium, Comparison with Philosophy of Organism 
and with Descartes; 'Withness of the Body/ Status of the 
Body in the Actual World; Ontological Status of Space for 
Newton, Descartes and the Organic Philosophy. 

V. Undifferentiated Endurance and the Passivity of Substance, 
Source of Errors. 

VI. Summary. 

Chapter III. The Order of Nature 83 

I. Order and Givenness Contrasted; The Four Characteristics 
of Order; Attainment of End, Lure of** Feeling; Causa Sui. 
II. 'Society' Defined, Defining Characteristic and Genetic Inher- 
itance; Environment,! Social and Permissive; Cosmic Epoch, 
Social Hierarchy. 

III. Evolution of Societies, Decay, Chaos, the Timaeus, the Schol- 
ium, Milton. 

IV. Societies in this Cosmic Epoch; The Extensive Society, the 

Geometric Society. Electromagnetic Society; Waves. Elec- 
trons, Protons. 
V. Enduring Objects, Corpuscular Societies, Structured Societies. 

VI. Stability, Specialization. 

VII. Problem of Stabilization, Exclusion of Detail, Conceptual Ini- 
tiative, Life. 

VIII. Inorganic Apparatus for Life. 
IX. Life a Reaction against Society, Originality. 
X. Life and Food, Life in Empty Space, Catalytic Agent. 
XL Living Persons, Canalization of Life, Dominant Personality 
only Partial. 

Chapter IV. Organisms and Environment 110 

I. Reaction of Environment on Actual Occasions; Narrowness 
and Width, Dependent on Societies, Orderly Element; 
Chaos, Triviality, Orderliness, Depth; Triviality,! Vagueness, 
Narrowness, Width; Incompatibility, Contrast; Triviality, 
Excess of Differentiation; Vagueness, Excess of Identifica- 
tion; Nexus as One, Vagueness, Narrowness, Depth; Coor- 
dination % of Chaos, Vagueness, Narrowness, Width. 
II. Intensity, Narrowness; Philosophy of Organism, Kant, Locke. 
III. Sensa, Lowest Category of Eternal Objects, Definition; Sensa, 
Contrasts of, Intensity; Contrasts in High and Low Cate- 
gories, Patterns; Eternal Objects, Simplicity, Complexity; 
Sensa Experienced Emotionally. 



Contents xxi 

SECTION 

IV. Transmission, Diverse Routes, Inhibitions, Intensification; 

Vector Character, Form of Energy; Physical Science. 
V. Environmental Data as in Perception; Visual Perception, 
Most Sophisticated Form; Originated by Antecedent State 
of Animal Body, Hume; Animal Body and External Envi- 
ronment, Amplifier.! 

VI. Perception and Animal Body, Causal Efficacy. 
VII. Causal Efficacy, Viscera; Presentational Immediacy, Delusive 
Perceptions, Secondary Qualities, Extension, Withness of 
Body; Hume, Kant. 
VIII. Loci Disclosed by Perception; Contemporary Regions, Causal 
Past, Causal Future; Immediate Present, Unison of Becom- 
ing, Concrescent Unison, Duration; Differentiation between 
Immediate Present and Presented Duration; Presented 
Locus. 

IX. Presented Locus and Unison of Becoming; Presented Locus, 
Systematic Relation to Animal Body, Strains, Independence 
of External Contemporary Happenings, Straight Lines, 
Measurement; Unison of Becoming, Duration. 
X. Summary. 

Chapter V. Locke and Hume 130 

I. Hume, Perceptions, Substance, Principle of Union; Ideas, 

Copies of Impressions, Imaginative Freedom. 
II. Hume and 'Repetition/ Cause and Effect; Memory, Force 
and Vivacity. 

III. Time, Hume, Descartes, Independence of Successive Occa- 

sions; Objective Immortality. 

IV. Influence of Subject-Predicate Notion; Hume, Descartes, 

Locke, Particular Existence. 
V. Hume and Locke, Process and Morphology; False Derivation 
of Emotional Feelings; Sensationalist Doctrine; Santayana. 

Chapter VI. From Descartes to Kant 144 

I. Descartes, Three Kinds of Substance: Extended, Mental, 
God's; Three Kinds of Change, of Accidents, Origination, 
Cessation; Accidental Relations, Representative Ideas; Un- 
essential Experience of External World. 
II. Locke, Empiricism, Adequacy, Inconsistency; Particular Exis- 
tent, Substance, Power; Relativity, Perpetually Perishing. 

III. Analogy and Contrast with Philosophy of Organism. 

IV. Hume and Process, Kant, Santayana. 

V. Contrasted Procedures of Philosophy of Organism and Kant. 



xxii Contents 

Chapter VII. The Subjectivist Principle 157 

SECTION 

I. The Subjectivist Principle and the Sensationalist Principle; 
The Sensationalist Doctrine Combines Both; Locke, Hume, 
Kant; Statement of the Principles; The Three Premises 
for the Subjectivist Principle; Philosophy of Organism 
Denies the Two Principles and the Three Premises; Des- 
cartes; 'That Stone as Grey/ Substance and Quality, Organs 
of Sensation; Descartes' Subjectivist Modification; 'Percep- 
tion of that Stone as Grey'; Failure to Provide Revised 
Categories; Hume. 
II. Knowledge, Its Variations, Vaguenesses; Negative Perception 
the General Case, Consciousness is the Feeling of Negation, 
Novelty; Consciousness a Subjective Form, Only Present in 
Late Derivative Phases of Complex Integrations; Conscious- 
ness only Illuminates the Derivative Types of Objective 
Data, Philosophy Misled by Clearness and Distinctness. 

III. Primitive Type of Physical Experience is Emotional; Vector 

Transmission of Feeling, Pulses of Emotion, Wave-Length; 
Human Emotion is Interpreted Emotion, Not Bare Emo- 
tional Feeling. 

IV. Decision Regulating Ingression of Eternal Objects, Old Meet- 

ing New; The Three Phases of Feeling:! Conformal, Con- 
ceptual, Comparative; Eternal Objects and Subjective 
Forms; Continuity of the Phases; Category of Objective 
Unity. 
V. Reformed Subjectivist Principle is Another Statement of Prin- 
ciple of Relativity; Process is the Becoming of Experience; 
Hume's Principle Accepted, This Method only Errs in 
Detail; 'Law' for 'Causation' no Help; Modern Philosophy 
Uses Wrong Categories; Two Misconceptions:! (i) Vacuous 
Actuality, (ii) Inherence of Quality in Substance. 

Chapter VIII. Symbolic Reference 168 

I. Two Pure Modes of Perception, Symbolic Reference; Com- 
mon Ground, Integration, Originative Freedom, Error; 
Common Ground, Presented Locus, Geometrical Indistinct- 
ness in Mode of Causal Efficacy; Exceptions, Animal Body, 
Withness of Body. 
II. Common Ground, Common Sensa; Modern Empiricism, 
Make-Believe, Hume; Sensa Derived from Efficacy of Body; 
Projection. 
HI. Mistaken Primacy of Presentational Immediacy, Discussion, 
Causal Efficacy Primitive. 



Contents xxiii 

section 
IV, Further Discussion; Causation and Sense-Perception, 
V. Comparison of Modes; Integration in Symbolic Reference. 
VI. Principles of Symbolism, Language. 

Chapter IX. The Propositions? 184 

I. Impure Prehensions by Integration of Pure Conceptual and 
Pure Physical Prehensions; Physical Purposes and Propo- 
sitions Discriminated; Theory, Not Primarily for Judgment, 
Lures for Feeling; Objective Lure; Final Cause; General 
and Singular Propositions; Logical Subjects, Complex Pred- 
icate; Propositions True or False; Lure to Novelty; Felt 
'Contrary' is Consciousness in Germ; Judgment and Enter- 
tainment; Graded Envisagement. 
II. Truth and Falsehood, Experiential Togetherness of Propo- 
sitions and Fact; Correspondence and Coherence Theory; 
Propositions True or False, Judgments Correct or Incor- 
rect or Suspended; Intuitive and Derivative Judgments; 
Logic Concerned with Derivative Judgments; Error. 

III. Systematic Background Presupposed by Each Proposition; Re- 

lations, Indicative Systems of Relations; Propositions and 
Indicative Systems; Illustration, Inadequacy of Words. 

IV, Metaphysical Propositions; One and One Make Two, 

V. Induction, Probability, Statistical Theory, Ground, Sampling, 

Finite Numbers. 
VI. Suppressed Premises in Induction, Presupposition of Defi- 
nite Type of Actuality Requiring Definite Type of Envi- 
ronment; Wider Inductions Invalid; Statistical Probability 
within Relevant Environment. 

VII. Objectification Samples Environment.* 

VIII. Alternative Non-Statistical Ground; Graduated Appetitions, 
Primordial Nature of God; Secularization of Concept of 
God's Functions. 

Chapter X. Process 208 

I. Fluency and Permanence; Generation and Substance; Spa- 
tialization; Two Kinds of Fluency:! Macroscopic and Micro- 
scopic, from Occasion to Occasion and within Each Occa- 
sion. 
II. Concrescence, Novelty, Actuality; Microscopic Concrescence. 
III. Three Stages of Microscopic Concrescence; Vector Charac- 
ters Indicate Macroscopic Transition; Emotion, and Sub- 
jective Form Generally, is Scalar in Microscopic Origina- 
tion and is the Datum for Macroscopic Transition. 



xxiv Contents 

SECTION 

IV. Higher Phases of Microscopic Concrescence. 
V. Summary. 



PART III 
THE THEORY OF PREHENSIONS 

Chapter I. The Theory of FEELiNGst 219 

I. Genetic and Morphological Analysis; Genetic Consideration 
is Analysis of the Concrescence, the Actual Entity Forma- 
liter; Morphological Analysis is Analysis of the Actual 
Entity as Concrete, Spatialized, Objective A 
II. Finite Truth, Division into Prehensions; Succession of Phases, 
Integral Prehensions in Formation; Five Factors: Subject, 
Initial Data, Elimination, Objective Datum, Subjective 
Form; Feeling is Determinate. 

III. Feeling Cannot be Abstracted from Its Subject; Subject, Aim 

at the Feeler, Final Cause, Causa Sui. 

IV. Categories of Subjective Unity, of Objective Identity, of 

Objective Diversity. 

V. Category of Subjective Unity; The One Subject is the Final 
End Conditioning Each Feeling, Episode in Self-Produc- 
tion; Pre-established Harmony, Self-Consistency of a Prop- 
osition, Subjective Aim; Category of Objective Identity, 
One Thing has one R61e, No Duplicity, One Ground of 
Incompatibility; Category of Objective Diversity, No Di- 
verse Elements with Identity of Function, Another Ground 
of Incompatibility. 

VI. World as a Transmitting Medium; Explanation; Negative 

Prehensions, with Subjective Forms. 
VII. Application of the Categories. 
VIII. Application (continued) A 

IX. Nexus. 

X. Subjective Forms; Classification of Feelings According to Data; 
Simple Physical Feelings, Conceptual Feelings, Transmuted 
Feelings; Subjective Forms not Determined by Data, Con- 
ditioned by Them. 

XL Subjective Form, Qualitative Pattern, Quantitative Pattern; In- 
tensity; Audition of Sound. 
XII. Prehensions not Atomic, Mutual Sensitivity; Indefinite Num- 
ber of Prehensions; Prehensions as Components in the Sat- 
isfaction and Their Genetic Growth; Justification of the 



Contents xxv 

section 

Analysis of the Satisfaction, Eighth and Ninth Categories 
of Explanation. 

Chapter II. The Primary Feelings 236 

I. Simple Physical Feeling, Initial Datum is one Actual Entity, 
Objective Datum is one Feeling Entertained by that one 
Actual Entity; Act of Causation, Objective Datum the 
Cause, Simple Physical Feeling the Effect; Synonymously 
'Causal Feelings'; Primitive Act of Perception, Initial Datum 
is Actual Entity Perceived, Objective Datum is the Per- 
spective, In General not Conscious Perception; Reason for 
'Perspective'; Vector Transmission of Feeling, Re-enaction, 
Conformal; Irreversibility of Time; Locke; Eternal Objects 
Relational, Two- Way R61e, Vector-Transference, Reproduc- 
tion, Permanence; Quanta of Feeling Transferred, Quantum- 
Theory in Physics, Physical Memory; Atomism, Continuity, 
Causation, Memory, Perception, Quality, Quantity, Ex- 
tension. 
II. Conceptual Feelings, Positive and Negative Prehensions; Cre- 
ative Urge Dipolar; Datum is an Eternal Object; Exclu- 
siveness of Eternal Objects as Determinants, Definiteness, 
Incompatibility. 

III. Subjective Form of Conceptual Prehension is Valuation; Inte- 

gration Introduces Valuation into Impure Feelings, Inten- 
siveness; Three Characteristics of Valuation: (i) Mutual 
Sensitivity of Subjective Forms, (ii) Determinant of Pro- 
cedure of Integration, (iii) Determinant of Intensive Em- 
phasis. 

IV. Consciousness is Subjective Form; Requires Its Peculiar Da- 

tum; Recollection, Plato, Hume; Conscious Feelings always 
Impure, Requires Integration of Physical and Conceptual 
Feelings; Affirmation and Negative Contrast; Not all Im- 
pure Feelings Conscious. 

Chapter III. The Transmission of Feelings 244 

I. Ontological Principle, Determination of Initiation of Feeling; 
Phases of Concrescence; God, Inexorable Valuation, Sub- 
jective Aim; Self-Determination Imaginative in Origin, Re- 
enaction. 
II. Pure Physical Feelings, Hybrid Physical Feelings; Hybrid Feel- 
ings Transmuted into Pure Physical Feelings; Disastrous 
Separation of Body and Mind Avoided; Hume's Principle, 
Hybrid Feelings with God as Datum. 



xxvi Contents 

section 

III. Application of First Categoreal Obligation: Supplementary 

Phase Arising from Conceptual Origination; Application of 
Fourth and Fifth Categoreal Obligations; Conceptual 
Reversion; Ground of Identity, Aim at Contrast. 

IV. Transmutation; Feeling a Nexus as One, Transmuted Physi- 

cal Feeling; R61e of Impartial Conceptual Feeling in Trans- 
mutation, Category of Transmutation, Further Explana- 
tions; Conceptual Feelings Modifying Physical Feelings; 
Negative Prehensions Important. 
V. Subjective Harmony, the Seventh Categoreal Obligation. 

Chapter IV. Propositions and Feelings 256 

I. Consciousness, Propositional Feelings, Not Necessarily Con- 
scious; Propositional Feeling is Product of Integration of 
Physical Feeling with a Conceptual Feeling; Eternal Objects 
Tell no Tales of Actual Occasions, Propositions are Tales 
That Might be\ Told of Logical Subjects; Proposition, True 
or False, Tells no Tales about Itself, Awaits Reasons; Con- 
ceptual Feeling Provides Predicative Pattern, Physical Feel- 
ing Provides Logical Subjects, Integration; Indication of 
Logical Subjects, Element of Givenness Required for Truth 
and Falsehood. 
II. Proposition not Necessarily Judged, Propositional Feelings not 
Necessarily Conscious; New Propositions Arise; Possible 
Percipient Subjects within the 'Scope of a Proposition/ 

III. Origination of Propositional Feeling, Four (or Five) Stages, 

Indicative Feeling, Physical Precognition, Predicative Pat- 
tern (Predicate), Predicative Feeling; Propositional Feeling 
Integral of Indicative and Predicative Feelings. 

IV. Subjective Forms of Propositional Feelings, Dependent on 

Phases of Origination; Case of Identity of Indicative Feel- 
ing with the Physical Recognition, Perceptive Feelings;t 
Case of Diversity, Imaginative Feelings; Distinction not 
Necessarily Sharp-Cut; The Species of Perceptive Feelings: 
Authentic, Direct Authentic, Indirect Authentic, Unau- 
thentic; Tied Imagination. 
V. Imaginative Feelings, Indicative Feeling and Physical Recog- 
nition Diverse, Free Imagination; Subjective Form Depends 
on Origination, Valuation rather than Consciousness; Lure 
to Creative Emergence; Criticism of Physical Feelings, 
Truth, Critical Conditions. 
VI. Language, Its Functionjf Origination of the Necessary Train 
of Feelings. 



Contents xxvii 

Chapter V. The Higher Phases of Experience 266 

section 

I. Comparative Feelings, Conscious Perceptions, Physical Pur- 
poses; Physical Purposes More Primitive than Proposi- 
tional Feelings. 
II. Intellectual Feelings, Integration of Propositional Feeling with 
Physical Feeling of a Nexus Including the Logical Subjects; 
Category of Objective Identity, Affirmation-Negation Con- 
trast; Consciousness is a Subjective Form. 

III. Belief, Certainty, Locke, Immediate Intuition. 

IV. Conscious Perception, Recapitulation of Origin; Direct and 

Indirect Authentic Feelings, Unauthentic Feelings; Trans- 
mutation; Perceptive Error, Novelty; Tests, Force and 
Vivacity, Analysis of Origination; Tests Fallible. 
V. Judgment, Yes-Form, No-Form, Suspense-Form; In Yes-Form 
Identity of Patterns, In No-Form Diversity and Incompati- 
bility, In Suspense-Form t Diversity and Compatibility; In- 
tuitive Judgment, Conscious Perception. 
VI. Affirmative Intuitive Judgment Analogous to Conscious Per- 
ception, Difference Explained; Inferential Judgment; Diver- 
gence from Locke's Nomenclature; Suspended Judgment. 
VII. Physical Purposes, Primitive Type of Physical Feeling; Retain- 
ing Valuation and Purpose, Eliminating Indeterminate- 
ness of Complex Eternal Object; Responsive Re-enaction; 
Decision. 
VIII. Second Species of Physical Purposes, Reversion Involved; 
Eighth Categoreal Obligation, Subjective Intensity; Imme- 
diate Subject, Relevant Future; Balance, Conditions for 
Contrast; Reversion as Condition for Balanced Contrast; 
Rhythm, Vibration; Categoreal Conditions; Physical Pur- 
poses and Propositional Feelings Compared. 



PART IV 
THE THEORY OF EXTENSION 

Chapter I. Coordinate Division 283 

I. Genetic Division is Division of the Concrescence, Coordinate 
Division is Division of the Concrete; Physical Time Arises 
in the Coordinate Analysis of the Satisfaction; Genetic 
Process not the Temporal Succession; Spatial and Temporal 
Elements in the Extensive Quantum; The Quantum is the 
Extensive Region; Coordinate Divisibility; Subjective Unity 



xxviii Contents 

SECTION 

Indivisible; Subjective Forms Arise from Subjective Aim; 
World as a Medium, Extensively Divisible; Indecision as to 
Selected Quantum. 
II. Coordinate Divisions and Feelings; Mental Pole Incurably 
One; Subjective Forms of Coordinate Divisions Depend on 
Mental Pole, Inexplicable Otherwise; A Coordinate Division 
is a Contrast, a Proposition, False, but Useful Matrix. 

III. Coordinate Division, the World as an Indefinite Multiplicity; 

Extensive Order, Routes of Transmission; External Exten- 
sive Relationships, Internal Extensive Division, One Basic 
Scheme; Pseudo Sub-organisms, Pseudo Super-organisms, 
Professor de Laguna's 'Extensive Connection/ 

IV. Extensive Connection is the Systematic Scheme Underlying 

Transmission of Feelings and Perspective; Regulative Con- 
ditions; Descartes; Grades of Extensive Conditions, Dimen- 
sions. 
V. Bifurcation of Nature; Publicity and Privacy. 
VI. Classification of Eternal Objects; Mathematical Forms, Sensa. 
VII. Elimination of the Experient Subject, Concrescent Immediacy. 

Chapter II. Extensive Connection 294 

I. Extensive Connection, General Description. 
II. Assumptions, i.e., Postulates, i.e.,* Axioms and Propositions 
for a Deductive System. 

III. Extensive Abstraction. Geometrical Elements, Points, Seg- 

ments. 

IV. Points, Regions, Loci; Irrelevance of Dimensions. 

Chapter III. Flat Loci 302 

I. Euclid's Definition of 'Straight Line/ 

II. Weakness of Euclidean Definition; Straight Line as Shortest 
Distance, Dependence on Measurement; New Definition of 
Straight Lines, Ovals. 

III. Definition of Straight Lines, Flat Loci, Dimensions. 

IV. Contiguity. 

V. Recapitulation. 

Chapter IV. Strains 310 

I. Definition of a Strain, Feelings Involving Flat Loci among the 
Forms of Definiteness of Their Objective Data; 'Seat' of a 



Contents xxix 

SECTION 

Strain; Strains and Physical Behaviour; Electromagnetic 
Occasions Involve Strains. 
II. Presentational Immediacy Involves Strains; Withness of the 
Body, Projection, Focal Region; Transmission of Bodily 
Strains, Transmutation, Ultimate Percipient, Emphasis; Pro- 
jection of the Sensa, Causal Efficacy Transmuted in Pre- 
sentational Immediacy; Massive Simplification; Types of 
Energy; Hume; Symbolic Transference, Physical Purpose. 

III. Elimination of Irrelevancies, Massive Attention to Systematic 

Order; Design of Contrasts; Importance of Contemporary 
Independence; Advantage to Enduring Objects. 

IV. Structural Systems, Discarding Individual Variations; Physi- 

cal Matter Involves Strain-Loci. 
V. The Various Loci Involved :t Causal Past, Causal Future, Con- 
temporaries, Durations, Part of a Duration, Future of a 
Duration, Presented Duration, Strain-Locus. 

Chapter V. Measurement 322 

I. Identification of Strain-Loci with Durations only Approximate; 
Definitions Compared; Seat of Strain, Projectors; Strain- 
Loci and Presentational Immediacy. 
II. Strain-Locus Wholly Determined by Experient; Seat and Pro- 
jectors Determine Focal Region; Animal Body Sole Agent 
in the Determination; Vivid Display of Real Potentiality of 
Contemporary World; New Definition of Straight Lines 
Explains this Doctrine; Ways of Speech, Interpretation of 
Direct Observation; Descartes' Inspectio. Realitas Objective, 
Judicium. 

III. Modern Doctrine of Private Psychological Fields; Secondary 

Qualities, Sensa; Abandons Descartes' Realitas Objectiva; 
Difficulties for Scientific Theory, AH Observation in Pri- 
vate Psychological Fields; Illustration, Hume; Conclusion, 
Mathematical Form, Presentational Immediacy in one 
Sense Barren, in Another Sense has Overwhelming Signifi- 
cance. 

IV. Measurement Depends on Counting and on Permanence; 

What Counted, What Permanent; Yard-Measure Perma- 
nent, Straight; Infinitesimals no Explanation; Approximation 
to Straightness, Thus Straightness Presupposed; Inches 
Counted, Non-Coincident; Modern Doctrine is Possibility of 
Coincidence, Doctrine Criticized; Coincidence is Test of 
Congruence, Not Meaning; Use of Instrument Presupposes 



xxx Contents 

section 

Its Self-Congruence: Finally all Measurement Depends on 
Direct Intuition of Permanence of Untested Instrument; 
Theory of Private Psychological Fields Makes Scientific 
Measurement Nonsense. 
V. Meaning of Congruence in Terms of Geometry of Straight 
Lines; Systems of Geometry; Sets of Axioms: Equivalent 
Sets, Incompatible Sets; Three Important Geometries :t El- 
liptic Geometry, Euclidean Geometry, Hyperbolic Geome- 
try; Two Definitions of a Plane; Characteristic Distinction 
between the Three Geometries; Congruence Depends on 
Systematic Geometry. 
VI. Physical Measurement, Least Action, Presupposes Geometrical 
Measurement; Disturbed by Individual Peculiarities; Phys- 
ical Measurement Expressible in Terms of Differential 
Geometry; Summary of Whole Argument. 



PART V 
FINAL INTERPRETATION 

Chapter I. The Ideal Opposites 337 

I. Danger to Philosophy is Narrowness of Selection; Variety of 
Opposites :t Puritan Self-Restraint and Aesthetic Joy, Sor- 
row and Joy; Religious Fervour and Sceptical Criticism, 
Intuition and Reason. 
II. Permanence and Flux, Time and Eternity. 

III. Order as Condition for Excellence, Order as Stifling Excel- 

lence; Tedium, Order Entering upon Novelty is Required; 
Dominant Living Occasion is Organ of Novelty for Animal 
Body. 

IV. Paradox:! Craving for Novelty, Terror at Loss; Final Religious 

Problem; Ultimate Evil is Time as 'Perpetually Perishing'; 
Final Opposites :t Joy and Sorrow, Good and Evil, Disjunc- 
tion and Conjunction, Flux and Permanence, Greatness and 
Triviality, Freedom and Necessity, God and the World; 
These Pairs Given in Direct Intuition, except the Last Pair 
Which is Interpretive. 

Chapter II. God and the World 342 

I. Permanence and Fiux, God as Unmoved Mover; Conceptions 
of God:t Imperial Ruler, Moral Energy, Philosophical Prin- 
ciple. 
II. Another Speaker to Hume's Dialogues Concerningf Natural 



Contents xxxi 

SECTION 

Religion; Primordial Nature Deficiently Actual, Neither 
Love nor Hatred for Actualities, Quotation from Aristotle. 

III. God's Nature Dipolar, Conceptual and Physical; This Physical 

Nature Derived from the World; Two Natures Compared. 

IV. God's Consequent Nature, Creative Advance Retaining Uni- 

son of Immediacy, Everlastingness; Further Analysis, Ten- 
derness, Wisdom, Patience; Poet of the World, Vision of 
Truth, Beauty, Goodness. 
V. Permanence and Flux, Relation of God to the World; Group 
of Antitheses: God and the World Each the Instrument of 
Novelty for the Other. 
VI. Universe Attaining Self-Expression of Its Opposites. 
VII. God as the Kingdom of Heaven; Objective Immortality At- 
taining Everlastingness, Reconciliation of Immediacy with 
Objective Immortality. 

Index 353 

Editors 7 Notes 389 



