PART I 
THE SPECULATIVE SCHEME 



CHAPTER I 
SPECULATIVE PHILOSOPHY 

SECTION I 

[4] This course of lectures is designed as an essay in Speculative Philos- 
ophy. Its first task must be to define 'speculative philosophy/ and to de- 
fend it as a method productive of important knowledge. 

Speculative Philosophy is the endeavour to frame a coherent, logical, 
necessary system of general ideas in terms of which every element of our 
experience can be interpreted. By this notion of 'interpretation' I mean 
that everything of which we are conscious, as enjoyed, perceived, willed, 
or thought, shall have the character of a particular instance of the general 
scheme. Thus the philosophical scheme should be coherent, logical, and, 
in respect to its interpretation, applicable and adequate. Here 'applicable' 
means that some items of experience are thus interpretable, and 'ade- 
quate' means that there are no items incapable of such interpretation. 

[5] 'Coherence,' as here employed, means that the fundamental ideas, in 
terms of which the scheme is developed, presuppose each other so that in 
isolation they are meaningless. This requirement does not mean that they 
are definable in terms of each other; it means that what is indefinable in 
one such notion cannot be abstracted from its relevance to the other 
notions. It is the ideal of speculative philosophy that its fundamental no- 
tions shall not seem capable of abstraction from each other. In other words, 
it is presupposed that no entity can be conceived in complete abstraction 
from the system of the universe, and that it is the business of speculative 
philosophy to exhibit this truth. This character is its coherence. 

The term 'logical' has its ordinary meaning, including 'logical' con- 
sistency, or lack of contradiction, the definition of constructs in logical 
terms, the exemplification of general logical notions in specific instances, 
and the principles of inference. It will be observed that logical notions must 
themselves find their places in the scheme of philosophic notions. 

It will also be noticed that this ideal of speculative philosophy has its 
rational side and its empirical side. The rational side is expressed by the 
terms 'coherent' and 'logical/ The empirical side is expressed by the terms 
'applicable' and 'adequate.' But the two sides are bound together by 
clearing away an ambiguity which remains in the previous explanation of 
the term 'adequate.' The adequacy of the scheme over every item does not 
mean adequacy over such items as happen to have been considered. It 



4 The Speculative Scheme 

means that the texture of observed experience, as illustrating the philo- 
sophic scheme, is such that all related experience must exhibit the same 
texture. Thus the philosophic scheme should be 'necessary/ in the sense of 
bearing in itself its own warrant of universality throughout all experience, 
provided that we confine ourselves to that which communicates with im- 
mediate matter of fact. But what does not so communicate is [6] unknow- 
able, and the unknowable is unknown; x and so this universality defined by 
'communication' can suffice. 

This doctrine of necessity in universality means that there is an essence 
to the universe which forbids relationships beyond itself, as a violation of 
its rationality. Speculative philosophy seeks that essence. 

SECTION II 

Philosophers can never hope finally to formulate these metaphysical 
first principles. Weakness of insight and deficiencies of language stand in 
the way inexorably. Words and phrases must be stretched towards a gen- 
erality foreign to their ordinary usage; and however such elements of lan- 
guage be stabilized as technicalities, they remain metaphors mutely ap- 
pealing for an imaginative leap. 

There is no first principle which is in itself unknowable, not to be cap- 
tured by a flash of insight. But, putting aside the difficulties of language, 
deficiency in imaginative penetration forbids progress in any form other 
that that of an asymptotic approach to a scheme of principles, only de- 
finable in terms of the ideal which they should satisfy. 

The difficulty has its seat in the empirical side of philosophy. Our datum 
is the actual world, including ourselves; and this actual world spreads itself 
for observation in the guise of the topic of our immediate experience. The 
elucidation of immediate experience is the sole justification for any 
thought; and the starting-point* for thought is the analytic observation of 
components of this experience. But we are not conscious of any clear-cut 
complete analysis of immediate experience, in terms of the various details 
which comprise its definiteness. We habitually observe by the method of -~ 
difference. Sometimes we see an elephant, and sometimes we do not. The 
result is that an elephant, when present, is noticed. [7] Facility of observa- 
tion depends on the fact that the object observed is important when 
present, and sometimes is absent. ^ 

The metaphysical first principles can never fail of exemplification. We 
can never catch the actual world taking a holiday from their sway. Thus, 
for the discovery of metaphysics, the method of pinning down thought to 
the strict systematization of detailed discrimination, already effected by 
antecedent observation, breaks down. This collapse of the method of rigid 
empiricism is not confined to metaphysics. It occurs whenever we seek the 

1 This doctrine is a paradox. Indulging in a species of false modesty, 'cautious' 
philosophers undertake its definition. 



Speculative Philosophy 5 

larger generalities. In natural science this rigid method is the Baconian 
method of induction, a method which, if consistently pursued, would have 
left science where it found it. What Bacon omitted was the play of a 
free imagination, controlled by the requirements of coherence and logic. 
The true method of discovery is like the flight of an aeroplane. It starts 
from the ground of particular observation; it makes a flight in the thin air 
of imaginative generalization; and it again lands for renewed observation 
rendered acute by rational interpretation. The reason for the success of 
this method of imaginative rationalization is that, when the method of 
difference fails, factors which are constantly present may yet be observed 
under the influence of imaginative thought. Such thought supplies the 
differences which the direct observation lacks. It can even play with in- 
consistency; and can thus throw light on the consistent, and persistent, 
elements in experience by comparison with what in imagination is incon- 
sistent with them. The negative judgment is the peak of mentality. But 
the conditions for the success of imaginative construction must be rigidly 
adhered to. In the first place, this construction must have its origin in the 
generalization of particular factors discerned in particular topics of human 
interest; for example, in physics, or in physiology, or in psychology, or in 
aesthetics, or in ethical beliefs, or in sociology, or in languages conceived 
as storehouses of human experience. In [8] this way the prime requisite, that 
anyhow there shall be some important application, is secured. The success 
of the imaginative experiment is always to be tested by the applicability 
of its results beyond the restricted locus from which it originated. In de- 
fault of such extended application, a generalization started from physics, 
for example, remains merely an alternative expression of notions appli- 
cable to physics. The partially successful philosophic generalization will, 
if derived from physics, find applications in fields of experience beyond 
physics. It will enlighten observation in those remote fields, so that gen- 
eral principles can be discerned as in process of illustration, which in 
the absence of the imaginative generalization are obscured by their per- 
sistent exemplification. 

Thus the first requisite is to proceed by the method of generalization 
so that certainly there is some application; and the test of some success 
is application beyond the immediate origin. In other words, some synop- 
tic vision has been gained. 

In this description of philosophic method, the term 'philosophic gen- 
eralization' has meant 'the utilization of specific notions, applying to a 
restricted group of facts, for the divination of the generic notions which 
apply to all facts/ 

In its use of this method natural science has shown a curious mixture 
of rationalism and irrationalism. Its prevalent tone of thought has been 
ardently rationalistic within its own borders, and dogmatically irrational 
beyond those borders. In practice such an attitude tends to become a dog- 
matic denial that there are any factors in the world not fully expressible 



6 The Speculative Scheme 

in terms of its own primary notions devoid of further generalization. Such 
a denial is the self-denial of thought. 

The second condition for the success of imaginative construction is un- 
flinching pursuit of the two rationalistic ideals, coherence and logical per- 
fection. 

Logical perfection does not here require any detailed [9] explanation. An 
example of its importance is afforded by the role of mathematics in the re- 
stricted field of natural science. The history of mathematics exhibits the 
generalization of special notions observed in particular instances. In any 
branches of mathematics, the notions presuppose each other. It is a re- 
markable characteristic of the history of thought that branches of math- 
ematics,! developed under the pure imaginative impulse, thus controlled, 
finally receive their important application. Time may be wanted. Conic 
sections had to wait for eighteen hundred years. In more recent years, the 
theory of probability, the theory of tensors, the theory of matrices are 
cases in point. 

The requirement of coherence is the great preservative of rationalistic 
sanity. But the validity of its criticism is not always admitted. If we con- 
sider philosophical controversies, we shall find that disputants tend to re- 
quire coherence from their adversaries, and to grant dispensations to them- 
selves. It has been remarked that a system of philosophy is never refuted; 
it is only abandoned. The reason is that logical contradictions, except as 
temporary slips of the mind— plentiful, though temporary— are the most 
gratuitous of errors; and usually they are trivial. Thus, after criticism, sys- 
tems do not exhibit mere illogicalities. They suffer from inadequacy and 
incoherence. Failure to include some obvious elements of experience in 
the scope of the system is met by boldly denying the facts. Also while a 
philosophical system retains any charm of novelty, it enjoys a plenary 
indulgence for its failures in coherence. But after a system has acquired 
orthodoxy, and is taught with authority, it receives a sharper criticism. 
Its denials and its incoherences are found intolerable, and a reaction sets 
in. 

Incoherence is the arbitrary disconnection of first principles. In modern 
philosophy Descartes' two kinds of substance, corporeal and mental, illus- 
trate incoherence. There is, in Descartes 7 philosophy, no reason why there 
should not be a one-substance world, only corporeal, or [10] a one-substance 
world, only mental. According to Descartes, a substantial individual 're- 
quires nothing but itself in order to exist/ Thus this system makes a virtue 
of its incoherence. But,t on the other hand, the facts seem connected, while 
Descartes' system does not; for example, in the treatment of the body- 
mind problem. The Cartesian system obviously says something that is 
true. But its notions are too abstract to penetrate into the nature of things. 

t 
The attraction of Spinoza's philosophy lies in its modification of Des- 
cartes' position into greater coherence. He starts with one substance, 



Speculative Philosophy 7 

causa sui, and considers its essential attributes and its individualized modes, 
i.e., the 'affectiones substantial The gap in the system is the arbitrary in- 
troduction of the 'modes/ And yet, a multiplicity of modes is a fixed 
requisite, if the scheme is to retain any direct relevance to the many oc- 
casions in the experienced world. 

The philosophy of organism is closely allied to Spinoza's scheme of 
thought. But it differs by the abandonment of the subject-predicate forms 
of thought, so far as concerns the presupposition that this form is a direct 
embodiment of the most ultimate characterization of fact. The result is 
that the 'substance-quality' concept is avoided; and that morphological 
description is replaced by description of dynamic process. Also Spinoza's 
'modes' now become the sheer actualities; so that, though analysis of them 
increases our understanding, it does not lead us to the discovery of any 
higher grade of reality. The coherence, which the system seeks to preserve, 
is the discovery that the process, or concrescence, of any one actual entity 
involves the other actual entities among its components. In this way the 
obvious solidarity of the world receives its explanation. 

In all philosophic theory there is an ultimate which is actual in virtue 
of its accidents. It is only then capable of characterization through its 
accidental" embodiments, and apart from these accidents is devoid of [11] 
actuality. In the philosophy of organism this ultimate is termed 'creativity'; 
and God is its primordial, non-temporal accident.* In monistic philoso- 
phies, Spinoza's or absolute idealism, this ultimate is God, who is also 
equivalently termed 'The Absolute.' In such monistic schemes, the ulti- 
mate is illegitimately allowed a final, 'eminent' reality, beyond that ascribed 
to any of its accidents. In this general position the philosophy of organ- 
ism seems to approximate more to some strains of Indian, or Chinese, 
thought, than to western Asiatic, or European, thought. One side makes 
process ultimate; the other side makes fact ultimate. 

SECTION III 

In its turn every philosophy will suffer a deposition. But the bundle 
of philosophic systems expresses a variety of general truths about the 
universe, awaiting coordination and assignment of their various spheres 
of validity. Such progress in coordination is provided by the advance of 
philosophy; and in this sense philosophy has advanced from Plato onwards. 
According to this account of the achievement of rationalism, the chief 
error in philosophy is overstatement. The aim at generalization is sound, 
but the estimate of success is exaggerated. There are two main forms of 
such overstatement. One form is what I have termed, f elsewhere, 2 the 
'fallacy of misplaced concreteness. 7 This fallacy consists in neglecting the 
degree of abstraction involved when an actual entity is considered merely 

2 Cf. Science and the Modem World, Ch. III. 



8 The Speculative Scheme 

so far as it exemplifies certain categories of thought. There are aspects of 
actualities which are simply ignored so long as we restrict thought to these 
categories. Thus the success of a philosophy is to be measured by its com- 
parative avoidance of this fallacy, when thought is restricted within its 
categories. 

The other form of overstatement consists in a false estimate of logical 
procedure in respect to certainty, and in respect to premises. Philosophy 
has been haunted by the unfortunate notion that its method is dogmati- 
cally to indicate premises which are severally clear, distinct, and [12] cer- 
tain; and to erect upon those premises a deductive system of thought. 

But the accurate expression of the final generalities is the goal of dis- 
— cussion and not its origin. Philosophy has been misled by the example of 
mathematics; and even in mathematics the statement of the ultimate 
logical principles is beset with difficulties, as yet insuperable. 3 The verifi- 
cation of a rationalistic scheme is to be sought in its general success, and 
not in the peculiar certainty, or initial clarity, of its first principles. In 
this connection the misuse of the ex absurdo argument has to be noted; 
much philosophical reasoning is vitiated by it. The only logical conclusion 
to be drawn, when a contradiction issues from a train of reasoning, is that 
at least one of the premises involved in the inference is false. It is rashly 
assumed without further question that the peccant premise can at once 
be located. In mathematics this assumption is often justified, and phi- 
losophers have been thereby misled. But in the absence of a well-defined 
categoreal scheme of entities, issuing in a satisfactory metaphysical system, 
every premise in a philosophical argument is under suspicion. 

Philosophy will not regain its proper status until the gradual elaboration 
of categoreal schemes, definitely stated at each stage of progress, is recog- 
nized as its proper objective. There may be rival schemes, inconsistent 
among themselves; each with its own merits and its own failures. It will 
then be the purpose of research to conciliate the differences. Metaphysical 
categories are not dogmatic statements of the obvious; they are tentative 
formulations of the ultimate generalities. 

If we consider any scheme of philosophic categories as one complex 
assertion, and apply to it the logician's alternative, true or false, the answer 
must be that the scheme is false. The same answer must be given to a like 
ques- [13] tion respecting the existing formulated principles of any science. 

The scheme is true with unformulated qualifications, exceptions, limita- 
tions, and new interpretations in terms of more general notions. We do 
not yet know how to recast the scheme into a logical truth. But the scheme 
is a matrix from which true propositions applicable to particular circum- 
stances can be derived. We can at present only trust our trained instincts 

3 Cf. Principia Mathematica, by Bertrand Russell and A. N. Whitehead, Vol. 
I, Introduction and Introduction to the Second Edition. These introductory 
discussions are practically due to Russell, and in the second edition wholly so. 



Speculative Philosophy 9 

as to the discrimination of the circumstances in respect to which the 
scheme is valid. 

The use of such a matrix is to argue from it boldly and with rigid logic. 
The scheme should therefore be stated with the utmost precision and 
definiteness, to allow of such argumentation. The conclusion of the argu- 
ment should then be confronted with circumstances to which it should 
apply. 

The primary advantage thus gained is that experience is not interrogated 
with the benumbing repression of common sense. The observation acquires 
an enhanced penetration by reason of the expectation evoked by the con- 
clusion of the argument. The outcome from this procedure takes one of 
three forms: (i) the conclusion may agree with the observed facts; (ii) the 
conclusion may exhibit general agreement, with disagreement in detail; 
(iii) the conclusion may be in complete disagreement witht the facts. 

In the first case, the facts are known with more adequacy and the ap- 
plicability of the system to the world has been elucidated. In the second 
case, criticisms of the observation of the facts and of the details of the 
scheme are both required. The history of thought shows that false inter- 
pretations of observed facts enter into the records of their observation. 
Thus both theory, and received notions as to fact, are in doubt. In the 
third case, a fundamental reorganization of theory is required either by 
way of limiting it to some special province, or by way of entire abandon- 
ment of its main categories of thought. 

[14] After the initial basis of a rational life, with a civilized language, has 
been laid, all productive thought has proceeded either by the poetic insight 
of artists, or by the imaginative elaboration of schemes of thought capable 
of utilization as logical premises. In some measure or other, progress is 
always a transcendence of what is obvious. 

Rationalism never shakes off its status of an experimental adventure. 
The combined influences of mathematics and religion, which have so 
greatly contributed to the rise of philosophy, have also had the unfortunate 
effect of yoking it with static dogmatism. Rationalism is an adventure in 
the clarification of thought, progressive and never final. But it is an ad- 
venture in which even partial success has importance. 

SECTION IV 

The field of a special science is confined to one genus of facts, in the 
sense that no statements are made respecting facts which lie outside that 
genus. The very circumstance that a science has naturally arisen concerning 
a set of facts secures that facts of that type have definite relations among 
themselves which are very obvious to all mankind. The common obvious- 
ness of things arises when their explicit apprehension carries immediate 
importance for purposes of survival, or of enjoyment— that is to say, for 
purposes of 'being' and of 'well-being/ Elements in human experience, 



10 The Speculative Scheme 

singled out in this way, are those elements concerning which language is 
copious and. within its limits, precise. The special sciences, therefore, deal 
with topics which lie open to easy inspection and are readily expressed by 
words. 

The study of philosophy is a voyage towards the larger generalities. 
For this reason in the infancy of science, when the main stress lay in the 
discovery of the most general ideas usefully applicable to the subject- 
matter in question, philosophy was not sharply distinguished from science. 
To this day, a new science with any substantial novelty in its notions is 
considered to be in some way [15] peculiarly philosophical. In their later 
stages, apart from occasional disturbances, most sciences accept without 
question the general notions in terms of which they develop. The main 
stress is laid on the adjustment and the direct verification of more special 
statements. In such periods scientists repudiate philosophy; Newton, justly 
satisfied with his physical principles, disclaimed metaphysics. 

The fate of Newtonian physics warns us that there is a development in 
scientific first principles, and that their original forms can only be saved 
by interpretations of meaning and limitations of their field of application- 
interpretations and limitations unsuspected during the first period of 
successful employment. One chapter in the history of culture is concerned 
with the growth of generalities. In such a chapter it is seen that the older 
generalities, like the older hills, are worn down and diminished in height, 
surpassed by younger rivals. 

Thus one aim of philosophy is to challenge the half-truths constituting 
the scientific first principles. The systematization of knowledge cannot be 
conducted in watertight compartments. All general truths condition each 
other; and the limits of their application cannot be adequately defined 
apart from their correlation by yet wider generalities. The criticism of 
principles must chiefly take the form of determining the proper meanings 
to be assigned to the fundamental notions of the various sciences, when 
these notions are considered in respect to their status relatively to each 
other. The determination of this status requires a generality transcending 
any special subject-matter. 

If we may trust the Pythagorean tradition, the rise of European philoso- 
phy was largely promoted by the development of mathematics into a 
science of abstract generality. But in its subsequent development the 
method of philosophy has also been vitiated by the example of mathe- 
matics. The primary method of mathematics is deduction; the primary 
method of philosophy is descrip- \16] tive generalization. Under the in- 
fluence of mathematics, deduction has been foisted onto philosophy as its 
standard method, instead of taking its true place as an essential auxiliary 
mode of verification whereby to test the scope of generalities. This mis- 
apprehension of philosophic method has veiled the very considerable suc- 
cess of philosophy in providing generic notions which add lucidity to our 
apprehension of the facts of experience. The depositions of Plato, Aristotle, 



Speculative Philosophy 11 

Thomas Aquinas, Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz, t Locke, Berkeley, Hume, 
Kant, Hegel, merely mean that ideas which these men introduced into the 
philosophic tradition must be construed with limitations, adaptations, and 
inversions, either unknown to them, or even explicitly repudiated by them. 
A new idea introduces a new alternative; and we are not less indebted to 
a thinker when we adopt the alternative which he discarded. Philosophy 
never reverts to its old position after the shock of a great philosopher. 



SECTION V 

Every science must devise its own instruments. The tool required for 
philosophy is language. Thus philosophy redesigns language in the same 
way that, in a physical science, pre-existing appliances are redesigned. It 
is exactly at this point that the appeal to facts is a difficult operation. This 
appeal is not solely to the expression of the facts in current verbal state- 
ments. The adequacy of such sentences is the main question at issue. It 
is true that the general agreement of mankind as to experienced facts is 
best expressed in language. But the language of literature breaks down 
precisely at the task of expressing in explicit form the larger generalities— 
the very generalities which metaphysics seeks to express. 

The point is that every proposition refers to a universe exhibiting some 
general systematic metaphysical character. Apart from this background, 
the separate entities which go to form the proposition, and the proposition 
as a whole, are without determinate character. Nothing [17] has been de- 
fined, because every definite entity requires a systematic universe to supply 
its requisite status. Thus every proposition proposing a fact* must, in its 
complete analysis, propose the general character of the universe required 
for that fact. There are no self-sustained facts, floating in nonentity. This 
doctrine, of the impossibility of tearing a proposition from its systematic 
context in the actual world, is a direct consequence of the fourth and the 
twentieth of the fundamental categoreal explanations which we shall be 
engaged in expanding and illustrating. A proposition can embody partial 
truth because it only demands a certain type of systematic environment, 
which is presupposed in its meaning. It does not refer to the universe in 
all its detail. 

One practical aim of metaphysics is the accurate analysis of propositions; 
not merely of metaphysical propositions, but of quite ordinary propositions 
such as There is beef for dinner today/ and 'Socrates is mortal/ The one 
genus of facts which constitutes the field of some special science requires 
some common metaphysical presupposition respecting the universe. It is 
merely credulous to accept verbal phrases as adequate statements of 
propositions. The distinction between verbal phrases and complete propo- 
sitions is one of the reasons why the logicians" rigid alternative, 'true or 
false," is so largely irrelevant for the pursuit of knowledge. 



12 The Speculative Scheme 

The excessive trust in linguistic phrases has been the well-known reason 
vitiating so much of the philosophy and physics among the Greeks and 
among the mediaeval thinkers who continued the Greek traditions. For 
example John Stuart Mill writes: 
They [the Greeks] t had great difficulty in distinguishing between 
things which their language confounded, or in putting mentally to- 
gether things which it distinguished,* and could hardly combine the 
objects in nature into any classes but those which were made for 
them by the popular phrases of their own country; or at least could 
not help fancying those classes to be natural, and all others arbitrary 
and artificial. Ac- [18] cordingly, scientific investigation among the 
Greek schools of speculation and their followers in the Middle Ages, 
was little more than a mere sifting and analysing of the notions at- 
tached to common language. They thought that by determining the 
meaning of words they could become acquainted with facts. 4 
Mill then proceeds to quote from Whewell 5 a paragraph illustrating the 
same weakness of Greek thought. 

But neither Mill, nor Whewell, tracks this difficulty about language 
down to its sources. They both presuppose that language does enunciate 
well-defined propositions. This is quite untrue. Language is thoroughly in- 
determinate, by reason of the fact that every occurrence presupposes some 
systematic type of environment. 

For example, the word 'Socrates/ referring to the philosopher, in one 
sentence may stand for an entity presupposing a more closely defined back- 
ground than the word 'Socrates/ with the same reference, in another sen- 
tence. The word 'mortal' affords an analogous possibility. A precise lan- 
guage must await a completed metaphysical knowledge. 

The technical language of philosophy represents attempts of various 
schools of thought to obtain explicit expression of general ideas pre- 
supposed by the facts of experience. It follows that any novelty in meta- 
physical doctrines exhibits some measure of disagreement with statements 
of the facts to be found in current philosophical literature. The extent of 
disagreement measures the extent of metaphysical divergence. It is, there- 
fore, no valid criticism on one metaphysical school to point out that its 
doctrines do not follow from the verbal expression of the facts accepted 
by another school. The whole contention is that the doctrines in question 
supply a closer approach to fully expressed propositions. 

The truth itself is nothing else than how the composite natures of the 
organic actualities of the world obtain ade- [19] quate representation in the 
divine nature. Such representations compose the 'consequent nature 7 of 
God, which evolves in its relationship to the evolving world without dero- 



* tLogic, Book V, Ch. III. 

5 Cf. Whewell's History of the Inductive Sciences. 



Speculative Philosophy 13 

gation to the eternal completion of its primordial conceptual nature. In 
this way the 'ontological principle' is maintained— since there can be no 
determinate truth, correlating impartially the partial experiences of many 
actual entities, apart from one actual entity to which it can be referred. 
The reaction of the temporal world on the nature of God is considered 
subsequently in Part V: it is there termed 'the consequent nature of God; 

Whatever is found in 'practice' must lie within the scope of the meta- 
physical description. When the description fails to include the 'practice/ 
the metaphysics is inadequate and requires revision. There can be no 
appeal to practice to supplement metaphysics, so long as we remain con- 
tented with our metaphysical doctrines. Metaphysics is nothing but the 
description of the generalities which apply to all the details of practice. 

No metaphysical system can hope entirely to satisfy these pragmatic 
tests. At the best such a system will remain only an approximation to the 
general truths which are sought. In particular, there are no precisely stated 
axiomatic certainties from which to start. There is not even the language 
in which to frame them. The only possible procedure is to start from verbal 
expressions which, when taken by themselves with the current meaning of 
their words, are ill-defined and ambiguous. These are not premises to be 
immediately reasoned from apart from elucidation by further discussion; 
they are endeavours to state general principles which will be exemplified 
in the subsequent description of the facts of experience. This subsequent 
elaboration should elucidate the meanings to be assigned to the words 
and phrases employed. Such meanings are incapable of accurate appre- 
hension apart from a correspondingly accurate apprehension of the meta- 
physical background which the [20] universe provides for them. But no lan- 
guage can be anything but elliptical, requiring a leap of the imagination to 
understand its meaning in its relevance to immediate experience. The posi- 
tion of metaphysics in the development of culture cannot be understood 
without remembering that no verbal statement is the adequate expression 
of a proposition. 

An old established metaphysical system gains a false air of adequate 
precision from the fact that its words and phrases have passed into current 
literature. Thus propositions expressed in its language are more easily 
correlated to our flitting intuitions into metaphysical truth. When we trust 
these verbal statements and argue as though they adequately analysed 
meaning, we are led into difficulties which take the shape of negations of 
what in practice is presupposed. But when they are proposed as first prin- 
ciples they assume an unmerited air of sober obviousness. Their defect is 
that the true propositions which they do express lose their fundamental 
character when subjected to adequate expression. For example consider 
the type of propositions such as The grass is green/ and 'The whale is 
big/ This subject-predicate form of statement seems so simple, leading 
straight to a metaphysical first principle; and yet in these examples it con- 
ceals such complex, diverse meanings. 



14 The Speculative Scheme 

SECTION VI 

It has been an objection to speculative philosophy that it is over- 
ambitious. Rationalism, it is admitted, is the method by which advance 
is made within the limits of particular sciences. It is, however, held that 
this limited success must not encourage attempts to frame ambitious 
schemes expressive of the general nature of things. 

One alleged justification of this criticism is ill-success: European thought 
is represented as littered with metaphysical systems, abandoned and un- 
reconciled. 

Such an assertion tacitly fastens upon philosophy the old dogmatic test. 
The same criterion would fasten ill- [21] success upon science. We no more 
retain the physics of the seventeenth century than we do the Cartesian 
philosophy of that century. Yet within limits, both systems express im- 
portant truths. Also we are beginning to understand the wider categories 
which define their limits of correct application. Of course, in that century, 
dogmatic views held sway; so that the validity both of the physical notions, 
and of the Cartesian notions, was misconceived. Mankind never quite 
knows what it is after. When we survey the history of thought, and like- 
wise the history of practice, we find that one idea after another is tried out, 
its limitations defined, and its core of truth elicited. In application to the 
instinct for the intellectual adventures demanded by particular epochs, 
there is much truth in Augustine's rhetorical phrase, Securus judicat orbis 
terrarum. At the very least, men do what they can in the way of system- 
atization, and in the event achieve something. The proper test is not that 
of finality, but of progress. 

But the main objection, dating from the sixteenth century and receiving 
final expression from Francis Bacon, is the uselessness of philosophic spec- 
ulation. The position taken by this objection is that we ought to describe 
detailed matter of fact, and elicit the laws with a generality strictly limited 
to the systcmatization of these described details. General interpretation, 
it is held, has no bearing upon this procedure; and thus any system of gen- 
eral interpretation, be it true or false, remains intrinsically barren. Un- 
fortunately for this objection, there are no brute, self-contained matters of 
fact, capable of being understood apart from interpretation as an element 
in a system. Whenever we attempt to express the matter of immediate ex- 
perience, we find that its understanding leads us beyond itself, to its con- 
temporaries, to its past, to its future, and to the universals in terms of 
which its definiteness is exhibited. But such universals, by their very charac- 
ter of universality, embody the potentiality of other facts with variant 
types of definiteness. Thus [22] the understanding of the immediate brute 
fact requires its metaphysical interpretation as an item in a world with some 
systematic relation to it. When thought comes upon the scene, it finds 
the interpretations as matters of practice. Philosophy does not initiate 
interpretations. Its search for a rationalistic scheme is the search for more 



Speculative Philosophy 15 

adequate criticism, and for more adequate justification, of the interpre- 
tations which we perforce employ. Our habitual experience is a complex 
of failure and success in the enterprise of interpretation. If we desire a 
record of uninterpreted experience, we must ask a stone to record its auto- 
biography. Every scientific memoir in its record of the 'facts' is shot 
through and through with interpretation. The methodology of rational 
interpretation is the product of the fitful vagueness of consciousness. Ele- 
ments which shine with immediate distinctness, in some circumstances, 
retire into penumbral shadow in other circumstances, and into black dark- 
ness on other occasions. And yet all occasions proclaim themselves as ac- 
tualities within the flux of a solid world, demanding a unity of interpre- 
tation. 

Philosophy is the self-correction by consciousness of its own initial ex- 
cess of subjectivity. Each actual occasion contributes to the circumstances 
of its origin additional formative elements deepening its own peculiar 
individuality. Consciousness is only the last and greatest of such elements 
by which the selective character of the individual obscures the external 
totality from which it originates and which it embodies. An actual in- 
dividual, of such higher grade, has truck with the totality of things by 
reason of its sheer actuality; but it has attained its individual depth of being 
by a selective emphasis limited to its own purposes. The task of philosophy 
is to recover the totality obscured by the selection. It replaces in rational 
experience what has been submerged in the higher sensitive experience 
and has been sunk yet deeper by the initial operations of consciousness 
itself. The selectiveness of individual experience is moral so far as it con- 
[23] forms to the balance of importance disclosed in the rational vision; and 
conversely the conversion of the intellectual insight into an emotional force 
corrects the sensitive experience in the direction of morality. The correc- 
tion is in proportion to the rationality of the insight. 

Morality of outlook is inseparably conjoined with generality of outlook. 
The antithesis between the general good and the individual interest can be 
abolished only when the individual is such that its interest is the general 
good, thus exemplifying the loss of the minor intensities in order to find 
them again with finer composition in a wider sweep of interest. 

Philosophy frees itself from the taint of ineffectiveness by its close rela- 
tions with religion and with science, natural and sociological. It attains its 
chief importance by fusing the two, namely, religion and science, into one 
rational scheme of thought. Religion should connect the rational gen- 
erality of philosophy with the emotions and purposes springing out of 
existence in a particular society, in a particular epoch, and conditioned by 
particular antecedents. Religion is the translation of general ideas into 
particular thoughts, particular emotions, and particular purposes; it is di- 
rected to the end of stretching individual interest beyond its self-defeating 
particularity. Philosophy finds religion, and modifies it; and conversely 
religion is among the data of experience which philosophy must weave into 



16 The Speculative Scheme 

its own scheme. Religion is an ultimate craving to infuse into the insistent 
particularity of emotion that non-temporal generality which primarily be- 
longs to conceptual thought alone. In the higher organisms the differences 
of tempo between the mere emotions and the conceptual experiences pro- 
duce a life-tedium, unless this supreme fusion has been effected. The two 
sides of the organism require a reconciliation in which emotional experi- 
ences illustrate a conceptual justification, and conceptual experiences find 
an emotional illustration. 

[24] This demand for an intellectual justification of brute experience has 
also been the motive power in the advance of European science. In this 
sense scientific interest is only a variant form of religious interest. Any sur- 
vey of the scientific devotion to 'truth/ as an ideal, will confirm this state- 
ment. There is, however, a grave divergence between science and religion 
in respect to the phases of individual experience with which they are con- 
cerned. Religion is centered upon the harmony of rational thought with 
the sensitive reaction to the percepta from which experience originates. 
Science is concerned with the harmony of rational thought with the per- 
cepta themselves. When science deals with emotions, the emotions in 
question are percepta and not immediate passions— other people's emotion 
and not our own: at least our own in recollection, and not in immediacy. 
Religion deals with the formation of the experiencing subject; whereas 
science deals with the objects, which are the data forming the primary 
phase in this experience. The subject originates from, and amid, given 
conditions; science conciliates thought with this primary matter of fact; 
and religion conciliates the thought involved in the process with the sensi- 
tive reaction involved in that same process. The process is nothing else 
than the experiencing subject itself. In this explanation it is presumed that 
an experiencing subject is one occasion of sensitive reaction to an actual 
world. Science finds religious experiences among its percepta; and religion 
finds scientific concepts among the conceptual experiences to be fused with 
particular sensitive reactions. 

The conclusion of this discussion is, first, the assertion of the old doctrine 
that breadth of thought reacting with intensity of sensitive experience 
stands out as an ultimate claim of existence; secondly, the assertion that 
empirically the development of self-justifying thoughts has been achieved 
by the complex process of generalizing! from particular topics, of imagi- 
natively schematizing the generalizations, and finally by renewed compari- 
son [25] of the imagined scheme with the direct experience to which it 
should apply. 

There is no justification for checking generalization at any particular 
stage. Each phase of generalization exhibits its own peculiar simplicities 
which stand out just at that stage, and at no other stage. There are sim- 
plicities connected with the motion of a bar of steel which are obscured 
if we refuse to abstract from the individual molecules; and there are certain 
simplicities concerning the behaviour of men which are obscured if we 



Speculative Philosophy 17 

refuse to abstract from the individual peculiarities of particular specimens. 
In the same way. there are certain general truths, about the actual things 
in the common world of activity, which will be obscured when attention 
is confined to some particular detailed mode of considering them. These 
general truths, involved in the meaning of every particular notion respect- 
ing the actions of things, are the subject-matter* for speculative philosophy. 

Philosophy destroys its usefulness when it indulges in brilliant feats of 
explaining away. It is then trespassing with the wrong equipment upon 
the field of particular sciences. Its ultimate appeal is to the general con- 
sciousness of what in practice we experience. Whatever thread of presup- 
position characterizes social expression throughout the various epochs of 
rational societyt must find its place in philosophic theory. Speculative bold- 
ness must be balanced by complete humility before logic, and before fact. 
It is a disease of philosophy when it is neither bold nor humble, but 
merely a reflection of the temperamental presuppositions of exceptional 
personalities. 

Analogously, we do not trust any recasting of scientific theory depend- 
ing upon a single performance of an aberrant experiment, unrepeated. The 
ultimate test is always widespread, recurrent experience; and the more 
general the rationalistic scheme, the more important is this final appeal. 

The useful function of philosophy is to promote the [26] most general 
systematization of civilized thought. There is a constant reaction between 
specialism and common sense. It is the part of the special sciences to 
modify common sense. Philosophy is the welding of imagination and com- 
mon sense into a restraint upon specialists, and also into an enlargement 
of their imaginations. By providing the generic notions philosophy should 
make it easier to conceive the infinite variety of specific instances which 
rest unrealized in the womb of nature. 



CHAPTER II 
THE CATEGOREAL SCHEME i 

SECTION I 

[27] This chapter contains an anticipatory sketch of the primary notions 
which constitute the philosophy of organism. The whole of the subsequent 
discussion in these lectures has the purpose of rendering this summary 
intelligible, and of showing that it embodies generic notions inevitably 
presupposed in our reflective experience— presupposed, but rarely expressed 
in explicit distinction. Four notions may be singled out from this sum- 
mary, by reason of the fact that they involve some divergence from 
antecedent philosophical thought. These notions are, that of an 'actual 
entity/ that of a 'prehension,' that of a 'nexus/ and that of the 'ontological 
principle/ Philosophical thought has made for itself difficulties by dealing 
exclusively in very abstract notions, such as those of mere awareness, mere 
private sensation, mere emotion, mere purpose, mere appearance, mere 
causation. These are the ghosts of the old 'faculties/ banished from 
psychology, but still haunting metaphysics. There can be no 'mere' to- 
getherness of such abstractions. The result is that philosophical discussion 
is enmeshed in the fallacy of 'misplaced concreteness.' x In the three no- 
tions—actual entity, prehension, nexus— an endeavour has been made to 
base philosophical thought upon the most concrete elements in our ex- 
perience. 

'Actual entities'- also termed 'actual occasions'— are the final real things - 
of which the world is made up. There is no going behind actual entities 
to find anything \28] more real. They differ among themselves: God is an 
actual entity, and so is the most trivial puff of existence in far-off empty 
space. But, though there are gradations of importance, and diversities of 
function, yet in the principles which actuality exemplifies all are on the 
same level. The final facts are, all alike, actual entities; and these actual 
entities are drops of experience, coi iplex and interdependent. 

In its recurrence to the notion oi a plurality of actual entities the phi- 
losophy of organism is through and through Cartesian. t The 'ontological 
principle' broadens and extends a general principle laid down by John 
Locke in his Essay (Bk. II, Ch. XXIII, Sect. 7),t when he asserts that 
"power" is "c? great part of our complex ideas of substances "\ The notion 

1 Cf. my Science and the Modern World, Ch. III. 
18 



The Categoreal Scheme 19 

of 'substance' is transformed into that of 'actual entity'; and the notion 
of 'power' is transformed into the principle that the reasons for things are 
always to be found in the composite nature of definite actual entities— 
in the nature of God for reasons of the highest absoluteness, and in the 
nature of definite temporal actual entities for reasons which refer to a 
particular environment. The ontological principle can be summarized as: 
no actual entity, then no reason. 

Each actual entity is analysable in an indefinite number of ways. In 
some modes of analysis the component elements are more abstract than 
in other modes of analysis. The analysis of an actual entity into 'pre- 
hensions' is that mode of analysis which exhibits the most concrete ele- 
ments in the nature of actual entities. This mode of analysis will be termed 
the 'division' of the actual entity in question. Each actual entity is 'divis- 
ible' in an indefinite number of ways, and each way of 'division' yields its 
definite quota of prehensions. A prehension reproduces in itself the general 
characteristics of an actual entitv: it is referent to an external world, and 
in this sense will be said to have a 'vector character'; it involves emotion, 
and purpose, and valuation, and causation. In fact, any characteristic of 
an actual entity is reproduced [29] in a prehension. It might have been a 
complete actuality; but, by reason of a certain incomplete partiality, a pre- 
hension is only a subordinate element in an actual entity. A reference to 
the complete actuality is required to give the reason why such a prehension 
is what it is in respect to its subjective form. This subjective form is 
determined by the subjective aim at further integration, so as to obtain 
the 'satisfaction' of the completed subject. In other words, final causation 
and atomism are interconnected philosophical principles. 

With the purpose of obtaining a one-substance cosmology, 'prehensions' 
are a generalization from Descartes' mental 'cogitations,' and from 
Locke's 'ideas,' to express the most concrete mode of analysis applicable 
to every grade of individual actuality. Descartes and Locke maintained a 
two-substance ontology— Descartes explicitly, Locke by implication. Des- 
cartes, the mathematical physicist, emphasized his account of corporeal 
substance; and Locke, the physician and the sociologist, confined himself 
to an account of mental substance. The philosophy of organism, in its 
scheme for one type of actual entities, adopts the view that Locke's ac- 
count of mental substance embodies, in a very special form, a more pene- 
trating philosophic description than does Descartes' account of corporeal 
substance. Nevertheless, Descartes' account must find its place in the 
philosophic scheme. On the whole, this is the moral to be drawn from 
the Monadologyt of Leibniz. His monads are best conceived as generaliza- 
tions of contemporary notions of mentality. The contemporary notions 
of physical bodies only enter into his philosophv subordinately and deriv- 
atively. The philosophy of organism endeavours to hold the balance more 
evenly. But it does start with a generalization of Locke's account of mental 
operations. 



20 The Speculative Scheme 

Actual entities involve each other by reason of their prehensions of each 
other. There are thus real individual facts of the togetherness of actual 
entities, which are real, individual, and particular, in the same sense in 
[30] which actual entities and the prehensions are real, individual, and par- 
ticular. Any such particular fact of togetherness among actual entities is 
called a *nexus ? (plural form is written 'nexus'). The ultimate facts of im- 
mediate actual experience are actual entities, prehensions, and nexus. All 
else is, for our experience, derivative abstraction. 

The explanatory purpose of philosophy is often misunderstood. Its 
business is to explain the emergence of the more abstract things from the 
more concrete things. It is a complete mistake to ask how concrete par- 
ticular fact can be built up out of universals. The answer is, In no way/ 
The true philosophic question 2 is, How can concrete fact exhibit entities 
abstract from itself and yet participated in by its own nature? 

In other words, philosophy is explanatory of abstraction, and not of 
concreteness. It is by reason of their instinctive grasp of this ultimate truth 
that, in spite of much association with arbitrary fancifulness and atavistic 
mysticism, types of Platonic philosophy retain their abiding appeal; they 
seek the forms in the facts. Each fact is more than its forms, and each 
form 'participates' throughout the world of facts. The definiteness of fact 
is due to its forms; but the individual fact is a creature, and creativity is 
the ultimate behind all forms, inexplicable by forms, and conditioned by 
its creatures. 



SECTION II 

The Categories 

, I. The Category of the Ultimate. 

II. Categories of Existence. 

III. Categories of Explanation. 

IV. Categoreal Obligations. 

It is the purpose of the discussion in these lectures to make clear the 
meaning of these categories, their appli- [31] cability, and their adequacy. 
The course of the discussion will disclose how very far they are from 
satisfying this ideal. 

Every entity should be a specific instance of one category of existence, 
every explanation should be a specific instance of categories of explanation, 
and every obligation should be a specific instance of categoreal obliga- 



2 In this connection I may refer to the second chapter of my book The Princi- 
ple of Relativity, Cambridge University Press, t 1922. 



The Categoreal Scheme 21 

tions. The Category^ of the Ultimate expresses the general principle pre- 
supposed in the three more special categories. 



The Category of the Ultimate 

'Creativity/ 'many/ 'one' are the ultimate notions involved in the mean- 
ing of the synonymous terms 'thing/ 'being/ 'entity/ These three notions 
complete the Category of the Ultimate and are presupposed in all the 
more special categories. 

The term "'one* does not stand for 'the integral number one/ which is 
a complex special notion. It stands for the general idea underlying alike 
the indefinite article 'a or an/ and the definite article 'the/ and the demon- 
stratives 'this or that/ and the relatives 'which or what or how. 7 It stands 
for the singularity of an entity. The term 'many' presupposes the term 
'one/ and the term 'one' presupposes the term 'many/ The term 'many' 
conveys the notion of 'disjunctive diversity'; this notion is an essential* 
element in the concept of 'being/ There are many 'beings' in disjunctive 
diversity. 

'Creativity* is the universal of universals characterizing ultimate matter 
of fact. It is that ultimate principle by which the many, which are the* 
universe disjunctively, become the one actual occasion, which is the uni- 
verse conjunctively. It lies in the nature of things that the many enter 
into complex unity. 

'Creativity' is the principle of novelty. An actual occasion is a novel 
entity diverse from any entity in the 'many' which it unifies. Thus 'creativ- 
ity' introduces novelty into the content of the many, which are the [32] 
universe disjunctively. The 'creative advance' is the application of this ul- 
timate principle of creativity to each novel situation which it originates. 

'Together' is a generic term covering the various special ways in which 
various sorts of entities are 'together' in any one actual occasion. Thus 
'together' presupposes the notions 'creativity/ 'many/ 'one/ 'identity' and 
'diversity/ The ultimate metaphysical principle is the advance from dis- 
junction to conjunction, creating a novel entity other than the entities 
given in disjunction. The novel entity is at once the togetherness of the 
'many' which it finds, and also it is one among the disjunctive 'many' 
which it leaves; it is a novel entity, disjunctively among the many entities 
which it synthesizes. The many become one, and are increased by one. 
In their natures, entities are disjunctively 'many' in process of passage into 
conjunctive unity. This Category of the Ultimate replaces Aristotle's 
category of 'primary substance/ 

Thus the 'production of novel togetherness' is the ultimate notion em- 
bodied in the term 'concrescence/ These ultimate notions of 'production 
of novelty' and of 'concrete togetherness' are inexplicable either in terms of 
higher universals or in terms of the components participating in the con- 



22 The Speculative Scheme 

crescence. The analysis of the components abstracts from the concrescence. 
The sole appeal is to intuition. 

The Categories of Existence 

There are eight Categories of Existence: 

(i) Actual Entities (also termed Actual Occasions), or Final Realities, 
or Res Verae. 

(ii) Prehensions, or Concrete Facts of Relatedness. 

(iii) Nexus (plural of Nexus), or Public Matters of Fact. 

(iv) Subjective Forms, or Private Matters of Fact. 

(v) Eternal Objects, or Pure Potentials for the Specific Determination 
of Fact, or Forms of Definiteness. 

(vi) Propositions, or Matters of Fact in Potential [33] Determination, or 
Impure Potentials for the Specific Determination of Matters of Fact, or 
Theories. 

(vii) Multiplicities, or Pure Disjunctions of Diverse Entities. 

(viii) Contrasts, or Modes of Synthesis of Entities in one Prehension, 
or Patterned Entities. t 

Among these eight categories of existence, actual entities and eternal 
objects stand out with a certain extreme finality. The other types of exis- 
tence have a certain intermediate character. The eighth category includes 
an indefinite progression of categories, as we proceed from 'contrasts' to 
'contrasts of contrasts/ and on indefinitely to higher grades of contrasts. 

The Categories of Explanation 

There are twenty-seven Categories of Explanation: 

(i) That the actual world is a process, and that the process is the be- 
coming of actual entities. Thus actual entities are creatures; they are also 
termed 'actual occasions/ 

(ii) That in the becoming of an actual entity, the potential unity of 
many entities in disjunctive diversity*— actual and non-actual— acquires 
the real unity of the one actual entity; so that the actual entity is the real 
concrescence of many potentials. 

(iii) That in the becoming of an actual entity, novel prehensions, nexus, 
subjective forms, propositions, multiplicities, and contrasts, also become; 
but there are no novel eternal objects. 

(iv) That the potentiality for being an element in a real concrescence* 
of many entities into one actuality! is the one general metaphysical char- 
acter attaching to all entities, actual and non-actual; and that every item 
in its universe is involved in each concrescence. In other words, it belongs 
to the nature of a 'being' that it is a potential for every 'becoming/ This 
is the 'principle of relativity/ 

(v) That no two actual entities originate from an iden- \34] tical uni- 
verse; though the difference between the two universes only consists in 



The Categoreal Scheme 23 

some actual entities, included in one and not in the other, and in the sub- 
ordinate entities which each actual entity introduces into the world. The 
eternal objects are the same for all actual entities. The nexus of actual 
entities in the universe correlate to a concrescencef is termed 'the actual 
world' correlate to that concrescence. 

(vi) That each entity in the universe of a given concrescence can, so far 
as its own nature is concerned, be implicated in that concrescence in one 
or other of many modes; but in fact it is implicated only in one mode: 
that the particular mode of implication is only rendered fully determinate 
by that concrescence, though it is conditioned by the correlate universe. 
This indetermination, rendered determinate in the real concrescence, is 
the meaning of 'potentiality.' It is a conditioned indetermination, and is 
therefore called a 'real potentiality/ 

(vii) That an eternal object can be described only in terms of its poten- 
tiality for 'ingression' into the becoming of actual entities; and that its 
analysis only discloses other eternal objects. It is a pure potential. The 
term 'ingression' refers to the particular mode in which the potentiality of 
an eternal object is realized in a particular actual entity, contributing to 
the definiteness of that actual entity. 

(viii) That two descriptions are required for an actual entity: (a) one 
which is analytical of its potentiality for 'objectiflcation' in the becoming 
of other actual entities, and (b) another which is analytical of the process 
which constitutes its own becoming. 

The term 'objectification' refers to the particular mode in which the 
potentiality of one actual entity is realized in another actual entity. 

(ix) That how an actual entity becomes constitutes what that actual 
entity is;t so that the two descriptions of an actual entity are not inde- 
pendent. Its 'being' is [35] constituted by its 'becoming; This is the 'prin- 
ciple of process/ 

(x) That the first analysis of an actual entity, into its most concrete 
elements, discloses it to be a concrescence of prehensions, which have 
originated in its process of becoming. All further analysis is an analysis 
of prehensions. Analysis in terms of prehensions is termed 'division/ 

(xi) That every prehension consists of three factors: (a) the 'subject' 
which is prehending, namely, the actual entity in which that prehension- 
is a concrete element; (b) the 'datum' which is prehended; (c) the 'sub- 
jective form' which is how that subject prehends that datum. 

Prehensions of actual entities— i.e., prehensions whose data involve 
actual entities — are termed 'physical prehensions'; and prehensions of 
eternal objects are termed 'conceptual prehensions/ Consciousness is not 
necessarily involved in the subjective forms of either type of prehension. 

(xii) That there are two species of prehensions: (a) 'positive prehen- 
sions' which are termed 'feelings,' and (b) 'negative prehensions' which 
are said to 'eliminate from feeling.' Negative prehensions also have sub- 
jective forms. A negative prehension holds its datum as inoperative in the 



24 The Speculative Scheme 

progressive concrescence of prehensions constituting the unity of the 
subject, 

(xiii) That there are many species of subjective forms, such as emotions, 
valuations, purposes, adversions, aversions, consciousness, etc. 

(xiv) That a nexus is a set of actual entities in the unity of the related- 
ness constituted by their prehensions of each other, or— what is the same 
thing conversely expressed— constituted by their objectifications in each 
other. 

(xv) That a proposition is the unity of. certain actual entities in their 
potentiality for forming a nexus, with its potential relatedness partially 
defined by certain eternal objects which have the unity of one complex 
eternal [36] object. The actual entities involved are termed the 'logical sub- 
jects/ the complex eternal object is the 'predicate/ 

(xvi) That a multiplicity consists of many entities, and its unity is con- 
stituted by the fact that all its constituent entities severally satisfy at least 
one condition which no other entity satisfies. 

Every statement about a particular multiplicity can be expressed as a 
statement referent either (a) to all its members severally, or (b) to an 
indefinite some of its members severally, or (c) as a denial of one of these 
statements. Any statement, incapable of being expressed in this form, is 
not a statement about a multiplicity, though it may be a statement about 
an entity closely allied to some multiplicity, i.e., systematically allied to 
each member of some multiplicity. 

(xvii) That whatever is a datum for a feeling has a unity as felt Thus 
the many components of a complex datum have a unity: this unity is a 
'contrast' of entities. In a sense this means that there are an endless num- 
ber of categories of existence, since the synthesis of entities into a contrast 
in general produces a new existential type. For example, a proposition is, 
in a sense, a 'contrast/ For the practical purposes of 'human understand- 
ing/ it is sufficient to consider a few basic types of existence, and to lump 
the more derivative types together under the heading of 'contrasts/ The 
most important of such 'contrasts' is the 'affirmation-negation' contrast 
in which a proposition and a nexus obtain synthesis in one datum, the 
members of the nexus being the 'logical subjects' of the proposition. 

(xviii) That every condition to which the process of becoming conforms 
in any particular instance! has its reason either in the character of some 
actual entity in the actual world of that concrescence, or in the character 
of the subject which is in process of concrescence. This category of ex- 
planation is termed the 'ontological principle.' It could also be termed the 
'principle of efficient, [37] and final, causation/ This ontological principle 
means that actual entities are the only reasons; so that to search for a 
reason is to search for one or more actual entities. It follows that any 
condition to be satisfied by one actual entity in its process expresses a fact 
either about the 'real internal constitutions' of some other actual entities, 
or about the 'subjective aim' conditioning that process. 



The Categoreal Scheme 25 

The phrase 'real internal constitution' is to be found in Locke's Essay 
Concerning Human Understanding (III, III, 15): "And thus the real 
internal (but generally in substances unknown) constitution of things, 
whereon their discoverable qualities depend, may be called their 'es- 
sence/ " Also the terms 'prehension' and 'feeling' are to be compared with 
the various significations of Locke's term 'idea.' But they are adopted as 
more general and more neutral terms than 'idea' as used by Locke, who 
seems to restrict them to conscious mentality. Also the ordinary logical 
account of 'propositions' expresses only a restricted aspect of their role in 
the universe, namely, when they are the data of feelings whose subjective 
forms are those of judgments. It is an essential doctrine in the philosophy 
of organism that the primary function of a proposition is to be relevant as 
a lure for feeling. For example, some propositions are the data of feelings 
with subjective forms such as to constitute those feelings to be the enjoy- 
ment of a joke. Other propositions are felt with feelings whose subjective 
forms are horror, disgust, or indignation. The 'subjective aim,' which con- 
trols the becoming of a subject, is that subject feeling a proposition with 
the subjective form of purpose to realize it in that process of self-creation. 

(xix) That the fundamental types of entities are actual entities, and 
eternal objects; and that the other types of entities only express how all 
entities of the two fundamental types are in community with each other, 
in the actual world. 

[38] (xx) That to 'function' means to contribute determination to the 
actual entities in the nexus of some actual world. Thus the determinaie- 
ness and self-identity of one entity cannot be abstracted from the com- 
munity of the diverse functionings of all entities. 'Determination' is an- 
alysable into 'definiteness' and 'position,' where 'definiteness't is the illus- 
tration of select eternal objects, and 'position' is relative status in a nexus 
of actual entities. 

(xxi) An entity is actual, when it has significance for itself. By this it is 
meant that an actual entity functions in respect to its own determination. 
Thus an actual entity combines self-identity with self-diversity. 

(xxii) That an actual entity by functioning in respect to itself plays 
diverse roles in self-formation without losing its self-identity. It is self- 
creative: and in its process of creation transforms its diversity of roles into 
one coherent role. Thus 'becoming' is the transformation of incoherence 
into coherence, and in each particular instance ceases with this attainment. 

(xxiii) That this self-functioning is the real internal constitution of an 
actual entity. It is the 'immediacy' of the actual entity. An actual entity 
is called the 'subject' of its own immediacy. 

(xxiv) The functioning of one actual entity in the self-creation of an- 
other actual entity is the 'objectification' of the former for the latter actual 
entity. The functioning of an eternal object in the self-creation of an ac- 
tual entity is the 'ingression' of the eternal object in the actual entity. 

(xxv) The final phase in the process of concrescence, constituting an 



26 The Speculative Scheme 

actual entity, is one complex, fully determinate feeling. This final phase 
is termed the 'satisfaction/ It is fully determinate (a) as to its genesis, 
(b) as to its objective character for the transcendent creativity, and (c) as 
to its prehension— positive or negative— of every item in its universe. 

(xxvi) Each element in the genetic process of an actual [39] entity has 
one self-consistent function, however complex, in the final satisfaction. 

(xxvii) In a process of concrescence, there is a succession of phases in 
which new prehensions arise by integration of prehensions in antecedent 
phases. In these integrations 'feelings' contribute their 'subjective forms 7 
and their 'data' to the formation of novel integral prehensions; but 'nega- 
tive prehensions' contribute only their 'subjective forms/ The process con- 
tinues till all prehensions are components in the one determinate integral 
satisfaction. 

SECTION III 

There are nine Categoreal Obligations: 

(i) The Category of Subjective Unity, The many feelings which belong 
to an incomplete phase in the process of an actual entity, though unin- 
tegrated by reason of the incompleteness of the phase, are compatible for 
integration by reason of the unity of their subject. 

(ii) The Category of Objective Identity. There can be no duplica- 
tion of any element in the objective datum of the 'satisfaction' of an actual 
entity, so far as concerns the function of that element in the 'satisfaction/ 

Here, as always, the term 'satisfaction' means the one complex fully 
determinate feeling which is the completed phase in the process. This 
category expresses that each element has one self-consistent function, how- 
ever complex. Logic is the general analysis of self-consistency. 

(iii) The Category of Objective Diversity. There can be no 'coalescence' 
of diverse elements in the objective datum of an actual entity, so far as 
concerns the functions of those elements in that satisfaction. 

'Coalescence' here means the notion of diverse elements exercising an 
absolute identity of function, devoid of the contrasts inherent in their 
diversities. 

(iv) The Category of Conceptual Valuation. From each physical feel- 
ing there is the derivation of a purely [40] conceptual feeling whose datum 
is the eternal object determinant of the defmiteness of the actual entity, or 
of the nexus, physically felt. 

*(v) The Category of Conceptual Reversion. There is secondary orig- 
ination of conceptual feelings with data which are partially identical with, 
and partially diverse from, the eternal objects forming the data in the first 
phase of the mental pole. The diversity is a relevant diversity determined 
by the subjective aim. 

Note that category (iv) concerns conceptual reproduction of physical 
feeling, and category (v) concerns conceptual diversity from physical 
feeling. 



The Categoreal Scheme 27 

(vi) The Category of Transmutation. When (in accordance with cate- 
gory [iv], or with categories [iv] and [v])t one and the same conceptual 
feeling is derived impartially by a prehending subject from its analogous 
simplet physical feelings of various actual entities in its actual world, then, 
in a subsequent phase of integration of these simple physical feelings to- 
gether with the derivate conceptual feeling, the prehending subject may- 
transmute the datum of this conceptual feeling into a characteristic of 
some nexus containing those prehended actual entities among its mem- 
bers, or of some part of that nexus. In this way the nexus (or its part), 
thus characterized, is the objective datum of a feeling entertained by this 
prehending subject. 

It is evident that the complete datum of the transmuted feeling is a 
contrast, namely ? 'the nexus, as one, in contrast with the eternal object/ 
This type of contrast is one of the meanings of the notion 'qualification 
of physical substance by quality/ 

This category is the way in which the philosophy of organism, which is 
an atomic theory of actuality, meets a perplexity which is inherent in all 
monadic cosmologies. Leibniz in his Monadology meets the same diffi- 
culty by a theory of 'confused' perception. But he fails to make clear how 
'confusion' originates. 

(vii) The Category of Subjective Harmony. The val- [41] uations of con- 
ceptual feelings are mutually determined by the adaptation of those feel- 
ings to be contrasted elements congruent with the subjective aim. 

Category (i) and category (vii) jointly express a pre-established harmony 
in the process of concrescence of any one subject. Category (i) has to do 
with data felt, and category (vii) with the subjective forms of the con- 
ceptual feelings. This pre-established harmony is an outcome of the fact 
that no prehension can be considered in abstraction from its subject, al- 
though it originates in the process creative of its subject. 

(viii) The Category of Subjective Intensity. The subjective aim, whereby 
there is origination of conceptual feeling, is at* intensity of feeling (a) in 
the immediate subject, and (/?) in the relevant future. 

This double aim— at the immediate present and the relevant future- 
is less divided than appears on the surface. For the determination of the 
relevant future, and the anticipatory feeling respecting provision for its 
grade of intensity, are elements affecting the immediate complex of feel- 
ing. The greater part of morality hinges on the determination of relevance 
in the future. The relevant future consists of those elements in the an- 
ticipated future which are felt with effective intensity by the present sub- 
ject by reason of the real potentiality for them to be derived from itself. 

(ix) The Category of Freedom and Determination. The concrescence of 
each individual actual entity is internally determined and is externally 
free. 

This category can be condensed into the formula, that in each con- 
crescence whatever is determinable is determined, but that there is always 



28 The Speculative Scheme 

a remainder for the decision of the subject-superject of that concrescence. 
This subject-superject is the universe in that synthesis, and beyond it there 
is nonentity. This final decision is the reaction of the unity of the whole 
to its own internal determination. This reaction is the final modification 
of emotion, appreciation, and purpose. But the decision [42] of the whole 
arises out of the determination of the parts, so as to be strictly relevant 
to it. 

SECTION IV 

The whole of thet discussion in the subsequent parts either leads up 
to these categories (of the four types) or is explanatory of them, or is 
considering our experience of the world in the light of these categories. 
But a few preliminary notes may be useful. 

It follows from the fourth category of explanation that the notion of 
'complete abstraction' is self-contradictory. For you cannot abstract the 
universe from any entity, actual or non-actual, so as to consider that entity 
in complete isolation. Whenever we think of some entity, we are asking, 
What is it fit for here? In a sense, every entity pervades the whole world; 
for this question has a definite answer for each entity in respect to any 
actual entity or any nexus of actual entities. 

It follows from the first category of explanation that 'becoming' is a 
creative advance into novelty. It is for this reason that the meaning of the 
phrase 'the actual world' is relative to the becoming of a definite actual 
entity which is both novel and actual, relatively to that meaning, and to 
no other meaning of that phrase. Thus, conversely, each actual entity 
corresponds to a meaning of 'the actual world' peculiar to itself. This point 
is dealt with more generally in categories of explanation (iii) and (v). An 
actual world is a nexus; and the actual world of one actual entity sinks 
to the level of a subordinate nexus in actual worlds beyond that actual 
entity. 

Trie first, the fourth, the eighteenth, and twenty-seventh categories state 
different aspects of one and the same general metaphysical truth. The first 
category states the doctrine in a general way: that every ultimate actuality 
embodies in its own essence what Alexander 3 \43] terms 'a principle of un- 
rest,' namely, its becoming. The fourth category applies this doctrine to the 
very notion of an 'entity.' It asserts that the notion of an 'entity' means 
'an element contributory to the process of becoming.' We have in this 
category the utmost generalization of the notion of 'relativity.' The eigh- 
teenth category asserts that the obligations imposed on the becoming of 
any particular actual entity arise from the constitutions of other actual 
entities. 

The four categories of explanation, (x) to (xiii), constitute the repudia- 

3 Cf. "Artistic Creation and Cosmic Creation," Proc. Brit. Acad., 1927 \ Vol. 
XIII. 



The Categoreal Scheme 29 

tion of the notion of vacuous actuality, which haunts realistic philosophy. 
The term Vacuous actuality' here means the notion of a res vera devoid of 
subjective immediacy. This repudiation is fundamental for the organic 
philosophy (cf. Part II, Ch. VII, 'The Subjectivist Principle'). The notion 
of Vacuous actuality' is very closely allied to the notion of the 'inherence 
of quality in substance/ Both notions— in their misapplication as funda- 
mental metaphysical categories— find their chief support in a misunder- 
standing of the true analysis of 'presentational immediacy' (cf. Part II, 
Ch. II, Sects. I and V). 

It is fundamental to the metaphysical doctrine of the philosophy of 
organism, that the notion of an actual entity as the unchanging subject 
of change is completely abandoned. An actual entity is at once the subject 
experiencing and the superject of its experiences. It is subject-superject, 
and neither half of this description can for a moment be lost sight of. 
The term 'subject' will be mostly employed when the actual entity is 
considered in respect to its own real internal constitution. But 'subject' 
is always to be construed as an abbreviation of 'subject-super ject.'* 

The ancient doctrine that 'no one crosses the same river twice' is ex- 
tended. No thinker thinks twice; and, to put the matter more generally, no 
subject experiences twice. This is what Locke ought to have meant by his 
doctrine of time as a 'perpetual perishing.' 

[44] This repudiation directly contradicts Kant's 'First Analogy of Expe- 
rience' in either of its ways of phrasing (1st or 2ndt edition). In the phi- 
losophy of organism it is not 'substance' which is permanent, but 'form.' 
Forms suffer changing relations; actual entities 'perpetually perish' sub- 
jectively, but are immortal objectively. Actuality in perishing acquires 
objectivity, while it loses subjective immediacy. It loses the final causation 
which is its internal principle of unrest, and it acquires efficient causation 
whereby it is a ground of obligation characterizing the creativity. 

Actual occasions in their 'formal' constitutions are devoid of all in- 
determination. Potentiality has passed into realization. They are complete 
and determinate matter of fact, devoid of all indecision. They form the 
ground of obligation. But eternal objects, and propositions, and some more 
complex sorts of contrasts, involve in their own natures indecision. They 
are, like all entities, potentials for the process of becoming. Their ingres- 
sion expresses the definiteness of the actuality in question. But their own 
natures do not in themselves disclose in what actual entities this poten- 
tiality of ingression is realized. Thus they involve indetermination in a 
sense more complete than do the former set. 

A multiplicity merely enters into process through its individual mem- 
bers. The only statements to be made about a multiplicity express how 
its individual members enter into the process of the actual world. Any 
entity which enters into process in this way belongs to the multiplicity, and 
no other entities do belong to it. It can be treated as a unity for this pur- 
pose, and this purpose only. For example, each of the six kinds of entities 



30 The Speculative Scheme 

just mentioned is a multiplicity t (i.e., not the individual entities of the 
kinds, but the collective kinds of the entities). A multiplicity has solely 
a disjunctive relationship to the actual world. The 'universe' comprising 
the absolutely initial data for an actual entity is a multiplicity. The treat- 
ment of a multiplicity as though it [45] had the unity belonging to an en- 
tity of any one of the other six kinds produces logical errors. Whenever the 
word 'entity' is used, it is to be assumed, unless otherwise stated, that it 
refers to an entity of one of the six kinds, and not to a multiplicity. 

There is no emergent evolution concerned with a multiplicity, so that 
every statement about a multiplicity is a disjunctive statement about its 
individual members. Entities of any of the first six kinds, and generic con- 
trasts, will be called 'proper entities/ 

In its development the subsequent discussion of the philosophy of or- 
ganism is governed by the belief that the subject-predicate form of propo- 
sition is concerned with high abstractions, except in its application to sub- 
jective forms. This sort of abstraction, apart from this exception, is rarely 
relevant to metaphysical description. The dominance of Aristotelian logic 
from the late classical period onwards has imposed on metaphysical 
thought the categories naturally derivative from its phraseology. This dom- 
inance of his logic does not seem to have been characteristic of Aristotle's 
own metaphysical speculations. The divergencies, such as they are, in these 
lectures from other philosophical doctrines mostly depend upon the fact 
that many philosophers, who in their explicit statements criticize the 
Aristotelian notion of 'substance/ yet implicitly throughout their discus- 
sions presuppose that the 'subject-predicate' form of proposition embodies 
the finally adequate mode of statement about the actual world. The evil 
produced by the Aristotelian 'primary substance' is exactly this habit of 
metaphysical emphasis upon the 'subject-predicate 7 form of proposition. 



CHAPTER III 
SOME DERIVATIVE NOTIONS 

SECTION I 

[46] The primordial created fact is the unconditioned conceptual valua- 
tion of the entire multiplicity of eternal objects. This is the 'primordial 
nature' of God. By reason of this complete valuation, the objectification of 
God in each derivate actual entity results in a graduation of the relevance 
of eternal objects to the concrescent phases of that derivate occasion. There 
will be additional ground of relevance for select eternal objects by reason 
of their ingression into derivate actual entities belonging to the actual 
world of the concrescent occasion in question. But whether or no this be 
the case, there is always the definite relevance derived from God. Apart 
from God. eternal objects unrealized in the actual world would be rela- 
tively non-existent for the concrescence in question. For effective relevance 
requires agency of comparison, and agency belongs exclusively to actual 
occasions.** This divine ordering is itself matter of fact, thereby condition- 
ing creativity. Thus possibility which transcends realized temporal matter 
of fact has a real relevance to the creative advance. God is the primordial 
creature; but the description of his nature is not exhausted by this concep- 
tual side of it. His 'consequent nature' results from his physical prehen- 
sions of the derivative actual entities (cf. Part V). 

'Creativity' is another rendering of the Aristotelian 'matter/ and of the 
modern 'neutral stuff/ But it is divested of the notion of passive recep- 
tivity, either of 'form/ or of external relations; it is the pure notion of the 
activity conditioned by the objective immortality of [47] the actual world— 
a world which is never the same twice, though always with the stable ele- 
ment of divine ordering. Creativity is without a character of its own in 
exactly the same sense in which the Aristotelian 'matter' is without a char- 
acter of its own. It is that ultimate notion of the highest generality at * 
the base of actuality. It cannot be characterized, because all characters are 
more special than itself. But creativity is always found under conditions, 
and described as conditioned. The non-temporal act of all-inclusive un- 
fettered valuation is at once a creature of creativity and a condition for 
creativity. It shares this double character with all creatures. By reason of 
its character as a creature, always in concrescence and never in the past, it 
receives a reaction from the world; this reaction is its consequent nature. 
It is here termed 'God'; because the contemplation of our natures, as 

31 



32 The Speculative Scheme 

enjoying real feelings derived from the timeless source of all order, acquires 
that 'subjective form' of refreshment and companionship at which reli- 
gions aim. 

This function of creatures, that they constitute the shifting character of 
creativity, is here termed the 'objective immortality' of actual entities. 
Thus God has objective immortality in respect to his primordial nature 
and his consequent nature. The objective immortality of his consequent 
nature is considered later (cf. Part V); we are now concerned with his 
primordial nature. 

God's immanence in the world in respect to his primordial nature is an 
urge towards the future based upon an appetite in the present. Appetition 
is at once the conceptual valuation of an immediate physical feeling com- 
bined with the urge towards realization of the datum conceptually pre- 
hended. For example, t 'thirst* is an immediate physical feeling integrated 
with the conceptual prehension of its quenching. 

Appetition x is immediate matter of fact including in itself a principle of 
unrest, involving realization of what [48] is not and may be. The imme- 
diate occasion thereby conditions creativity so as to procure, in the future, 
physical realization of its mental pole, according to the various valuations 
inherent in its various conceptual prehensions. All physical experience is 
accompanied by an appetite for, or against, its continuance: an example is 
the appetition of self-preservation. But the origination of the novel con- 
ceptual prehension has, more especially, to be accounted for. Thirst is an 
appetite towards a difference— towards something relevant, something 
largely identical, but something with a definite novelty. This is an example 
at a low level which shows the germ of a free imagination. 

In what sense can unrealized abstract form be relevant? What is its basis 
of relevance? 'Relevance' must express some real fact of togetherness 
among forms. The ontological principle can be expressed as: All real to- 
getherness is togetherness in the formal constitution of an actuality. So if 
there be a relevance of what in the temporal world is unrealized, the rele- 
vance must express a fact of togetherness in the formal constitution of a 
non-temporal actuality. But by the principle of relativity there can only be 
one non-derivative actuality, unbounded by its prehensions of an actual 
world. Such a primordial superject of creativity achieves, in its unity of 
satisfaction, the complete conceptual valuation of all eternal objects. This 
is the ultimate, basic adjustment of the togetherness of eternal objects on 
which creative order depends. It is the conceptual adjustment of all ap- 
petites in the form of aversions and adversions. It constitutes the meaning 
of relevance. Its status as an actual efficient fact is recognized by terming 
it the 'primordial nature of God/ 

The word 'appetition' illustrates a danger which lurks in technical terms. 
This same danger is also illustrated in the psychology derived from Freud. 

1 Cf . Leibniz's Monadology. 



Some Derivative Notions 33 

The mental poles of actualities contribute various grades of complex feel- 
ings to the actualities including them as factors. The [49] basic operations 
of mentality are 'conceptual prehensions.' These are the only operations of 
'pure' mentality. All other mental operations are 'impure/ in the sense 
that they involve integrations of conceptual prehensions with the physical 
prehensions of the physical pole. Since 'impurity* in prehension refers to 
the prehension arising out of the integration of 'pure' physical prehensions 
with 'pure' mental prehensions, it follows that an 'impure' t mental pre- 
hension is also an 'impure' physical prehension and conversely. Thus the 
term 'impure' applied to a prehension has a perfectly definite meaning; 
and does not require the terms 'mental' or 'physical/ except for the direc- 
tion of attention in the discussion concerned. 

The technical term 'conceptual prehension' is entirely neutral, devoid 
of all suggestiveness. But such terms present great difficulties to the under- 
standing, by reason of the fact that they suggest no particular exemplifica- 
tions. Accordingly, we seek equivalent terms which have about them the 
suggestiveness of familiar fact. We have chosen the term 'appetition/ 
which suggests exemplifications in our own experience, also in lower forms 
of life such as insects and vegetables. But even in human experience 'ap- 
petition' suggests a degrading notion of this basic activity in its more in- 
tense operations. We are closely concerned with what Bergson calls 'intui- 
tion'— with some differences however. Bergson's 'intuition' t is an 'impure' 
operation; it is an integral feeling derived from the synthesis of the con- 
ceptual prehension with the physical prehension from which it has been 
derived according to the 'Category of Conceptual Reproduction' (Cate- 
goreal Obligation! IV). It seems that Bergson's term 'intuition' has the 
same meaning as 'physical purpose' in Part III of these lectures. Also 
Bergson's 'intuition' seems to abstract from the subjective form of emotion 
and purpose. This subjective form is an essential element in the notion of 
'conceptual prehension,' as indeed in that of any prehension. It is an essen- 
tial element in 'physical purpose' (cf. Part III), If we con- [SO] sider these 
'pure' mental operations in their most intense operations, we should choose 
the term 'vision.' A conceptual prehension is a direct vision of some possi- 
bility of good or oft evil— of some possibility as to how actualities may be 
definite. There is no reference to particular actualities, or to any par- 
ticular actual world. The phrase 'of good or of evil' has been added to in- 
clude a reference to the subjective form; the mere word 'vision' abstracts 
from this factor in a conceptual prehension. If we say that God's primor- 
dial nature is a completeness of 'appetition,' f we give due weight to the 
subjective form— at a cost. If we say that God's primordial nature is 'in- 
tuition/ we suggest mentality which is 'impure' by reason of synthesis with 
physical prehension. If we say that God's primordial nature is 'vision,' we 
suggest a maimed view of the subjective form, divesting it of yearning 
after concrete fact— no particular facts, but after some actuality. There is 
deficiency in God's primordial nature which the term 'vision' obscures. 



34 The Speculative Scheme 

One advantage of the term Vision' is that it connects this doctrine of God 
more closely with philosophical tradition. 'Envisagement' is perhaps a safer 
term than Vision/ To sum up: God's primordial nature' is abstracted from 
his commerce with 'particulars/ and is therefore devoid of those 'impure' 
intellectual cogitations which involve propositions (cf. Part III). It is God 
in abstraction, alone with himself. As such it is a mere factor in God, de- 
ficient in actuality. 

SECTION II 

The notions of 'social order' and of 'personal order' cannot be omitted 
from this preliminary sketch. A 'society/ in the sense in which that term 
is here used, is a nexus with social order; and an 'enduring object/ or 'en- 
during creature/ is a society whose social order has taken the special form 
of 'personal order.' 

A nexus enjoys 'social order' where (i) there is a common element of 
form illustrated in the definiteness [Si] of each of its included actual en- 
tities, and (ii) this common element of form arises in each member of the 
nexus by reason of the conditions imposed upon it by its prehensions of 
some other members of the nexus, and (iii) these prehensions impose that 
condition of reproduction by reason of their inclusion of positive feelings 
of that* common form. Such a nexus is called a 'society/ and the common 
form is the 'defining characteristic' of the society. The notion f of 'defining 
characteristic' is allied to the Aristotelian notion oft 'substantial form/ 

The common element of form is simply a complex eternal object ex- 
emplified in each member of the nexus. But the social order of the nexus 
is not the mere fact of this common form exhibited by all its members. The 
reproduction of the common form throughout the nexus is due to the 
genetic relations of the members of the nexus among each other, and to 
the additional fact that genetic relations include feelings of the common 
form. Thus the defining characteristic is inherited throughout the nexus, 
each member deriving it from those other members of the nexus which 
are antecedent to its own concrescence. 

A nexus enjoys 'personal order' when (a) it is a 'society/ and (/?) when 
the genetic relatedness of its members orders these members 'serially/ 

By this 'serial ordering' arising from the genetic relatedness, it is meant 
that any member of the nexus— excluding the first and the last, if there be 
such— constitutes a 'cut' in the nexus, so that (a) this member inherits 
from all members on one side of the cut, and from no members on the 
other side of the cut, and (b) if A and B are two members of the nexus 
and B inherits from A, then the side of B's+ cut, inheriting from B, forms 
part of the side of A's cut, inheriting from A, and the side of A's cut from 
which A inherits forms part of the side of B's cut from which B inherits. 
Thus the nexus forms a single line of inheritance of its defining character- 
istic. Such a nexus is called an 'enduring object/ It might have been 



Some Derivative Notions 35 

termed a 'person/ in the legal sense [52] of that term. But unfortunately 
'person' suggests the notion of consciousness, so that its use would lead to 
misunderstanding. The nexus 'sustains a character/ and this is one of the 
meanings of the Latin word persona. But an 'enduring object/ qua 'per- 
son/ does more than sustain a character. For this sustenance arises out of 
the special genetic relations among the members of the nexus. An ordinary 
physical object, which has temporal endurance, is a society. In the ideally 
simple case, it has personal order and is an 'enduring object. 7 A society may 
(or may not) be analysable into many strands of 'enduring objects/ This 
will be the case for most ordinary physical objects. These enduring objects 
and 'societies/ analysable into strands of enduring objects, are the per- 
manent entities which enjoy adventures of change throughout time and 
space. For example, they form the subject-matter of the science of dy- 
namics. Actual entities perish, but do not change; they are what they are. 
A nexus which (i) enjoys social order, and (ii) is analysable into strands 
of enduring objects may be termed a 'corpuscular society/ A society may 
be more or less corpuscular, according to the relative importance of the 
defining characteristics of the various enduring objects compared to that 
of the defining characteristic of the whole corpuscular nexus. 

SECTION III 

There is a prevalent misconception that 'becoming' involves the notion 
of a unique seriality for its advance into novelty. This is the classic notion 
of 'time/ which philosophy took over from common sense. Mankind made 
an unfortunate generalization from its experience of enduring objects. Re- 
cently physical science has abandoned this notion. Accordingly we should 
now purge cosmology of a point of view which it ought never to have 
adopted as an ultimate metaphysical principle. In these lectures the term 
'creative advance' is not to be construed in the sense of a uniquely serial 
advance. 

[S3] Finally, the extensive continuity of the physical universe has usually 
been construed to mean that there is a continuity of becoming. But if we 
admit that 'something becomes/ it is easy, by employing Zeno's method, to 
prove that there can be no continuity of becoming. 2 There is a becoming 
of continuity, but no continuity of becoming. The actual occasions are the 
creatures which become, and they constitute a continuously extensive 
world. In other words, extensiveness becomes, but 'becoming' is not itself 
extensive. 

Thus the ultimate metaphysical truth is atomism. The creatures are 
atomic. In the present cosmic epoch there is a creation of continuity. Per- 
haps such creation is an ultimate metaphysical truth holding of all cosmic 

2 Cf. Part II, Ch. II, Sect. II; and also my Science and the Modern World, 
Ch. VII, for a discussion of this argument. 



36 The Speculative Scheme 

epochs; but this does not* seem to be a necessary conclusion. The more 
likely opinion is that extensive continuity is a special condition arising 
from the society of creatures which constitute our immediate epoch. But 
atomism does not exclude complexityt and universal relativity. Each atom 
is a system of all things. 

The proper balance between atomism and continuity is of importance to 
physical science. For example, the doctrine, here explained, conciliates 
Newton's corpuscular theory of light with the wave theory. For both a 
corpuscle, and an advancing element of at wave front, are merely a per- 
manent form propagated from atomic creature to atomic creature. A cor- 
puscle is in fact an 'enduring object.' The notion of an 'enduring object' 
is, however, capable of more or less completeness of realization. Thus, in 
different stages of its career, a wave of light may be more or less corpuscu- 
lar. A train of such waves at all stages of its career involves social order; 
but in the earlier stages this social order takes the more special form of 
loosely related strands of personal order. This dominant personal order 
gradually vanishes as the time advances. Its defining characteristics become 
less and [54] less important, as their various features peter out. The waves 
then become a nexus with important social order, but with no strands of 
personal order. Thus the train of waves starts as a corpuscular society, and 
ends as a society which is not corpuscular. 

SECTION IV 

Finally, in the cdsmological scheme here outlined one implicit assump- 
tion of the philosophical tradition is repudiated. The assumption is that 
the basic elements of experience are to be described in terms of one, or 
all, of the three ingredients, consciousness, thought, sense-perception. The 
last term is used in the sense of 'conscious perception in the mode of pre- 
sentational immediacy/ Also in practice sense-perception is narrowed 
down to visual perception. According to the philosophy of organism these 
three components are unessential elements in experience, either physical 
or mental. Any instance of experience is dipolar, whether that instance 
be God or an actual occasion of the world. The origination of God is from 
the mental pole, the origination of an actual occasion is from the physical 
pole; but in either case these elements, consciousness, thought, sense-per- 
ception, belong to the derivative 'impure 7 phases of the concrescence, if in 
any effective sense they enter at all. 

This repudiation is the reason why, in relation to the topic under discus- 
sion, the status of presentational immediacy is a recurrent theme through- 
out the subsequent Partst of these lectures. 


