PART II 
DISCUSSIONS AND APPLICATIONS 



CHAPTER I 
FACT AND FORM 

SECTION I 

[62] All human discourse which bases its claim to consideration on the 
truth of its statements must appeal to the facts. In none of its branches 
can philosophy claim immunity to this rule. But in the case of philosophy 
the difficulty arises that the record of the facts is in part dispersed vaguely 
through the various linguistic expressions of civilized language and of 
literature, and is in part expressed more precisely under the influence of 
schemes of thought prevalent in the traditions of science and philosophy. 

In this second part of these lectures, the scheme of [63] thought which is 
the basis of the philosophy of organism is confronted with various interpre- 
tations of the facts widely accepted in thet European tradition, literary, 
philosophic, and scientific. So far as concerns philosophy only a selected 
group can be explicitly mentioned. There is no point in endeavouring to 
force the interpretations of divergent philosophers into a vague agreement. 
What is important is that the scheme of interpretation here adopted can 
claim for each of its main positions the express authority of one, or the 
other, of some supreme master of thought—Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, 
Locke, Hume, Kant. But ultimately nothing rests on authority; the final 
court of appeal is intrinsic reasonableness. 

The safest general characterization of the European philosophical tradi- 
tion is that it consists of a series of footnotes to Plato. I do not mean the 
systematic scheme of thought which scholars have doubtfully extracted 
from his writings. I allude to the wealth of general ideas scattered through 
them. His personal endowments, his wide opportunities for experience at 
a great period of civilization, his inheritance of an intellectual tradition 
not yet stiffened by excessive systematization, have made his writings t an 
inexhaustible mine of suggestion. Thus in one sense by stating my belief 
that the train of thought in these lectures is Platonic, I am doing no more 
than expressing the hope that it falls within the European tradition. But I 
do mean more: I mean that if we had to render Plato's general point of 
view with the least changes made necessary by the intervening two thou- 
sand years of human experience in social organization, in aesthetic attain- 
ments, in science, and in religion, we should have to set about the con- 
struction of a philosophy of organism. In such a philosophy the actualities 
constituting the process of the world are conceived as exemplifying the 

39 



40 Discussions and Applications 

ingression (or 'participation') of other things which constitute the poten- 
tialities of definiteness for any actual existence. The things which are tem- 
poral arise by their participation in the things which are eternal. The 
[64] two sets are mediated by a thing which combines the actuality of what 
is temporal with the timelessness of what is potential. This final entity is 
the divine element in the world, by which the barren inefficient disjunction 
of abstract potentialities obtains primordially the efficient conjunction of 
ideal realization. This ideal realization of potentialities in a primordial 
actual entity constitutes the metaphysical stability whereby the actual 
process exemplifies general principles of metaphysics, and attains the ends 
proper to specific types of emergent order. By reason of the actuality of this 
primordial valuation of pure potentials, each eternal object has a definite, 
effective relevance to each concrescent process. Apart from such orderings,** 
there would be a complete disjunction of eternal objects unrealized in the 
temporal world. Novelty would be meaningless, and inconceivable. We are 
here extending and rigidly applying Hume's principle, that ideas of reflec- 
tion are derived from actual facts. 

By this recognition of the divine element the general Aristotelian princi- 
ple is maintained that, apart from things that are actual, there is nothing 
—nothing either in fact or in efficacy. This is the true general principle 
which also underlies Descartes' dictum: "For this reason, when we per- 
ceive any attribute, we therefore conclude that some existing thing or 
substance to which it may be attributed, is necessarily present." *■ And 
again: "for every clear and distinct conception (perceptio) is without 
doubt something, and hence cannot derive its origin from what is 
nought, . . ." 2 This general principle will be termed the 'ontological prin- 
ciple. 7 It is the principle that everything is positively somewhere in ac- 
tuality, and in potency everywhere. In one of its applications this principle 
issues in the doctrine of 'conceptualising Thus [65] the search for a reason 
is always the search for an actual fact which is the vehicle of the reason. The 
ontological principle, as here defined, constitutes the first step in the de- 
scription of the universe as a solidarity 3 of many actual entities. Each 
actual entity is conceived as an act of experience arising out of data. It is 
a process of 'feeling' the many data, so as to absorb them into the unity of 
one individual 'satisfaction/ Here 'feeling' is the term used for the basic 
generic operation of passing from the objectivity of the data to the sub- 
jectivity of the actual entity in question. Feelings are variously specialized 



1 Principles of Philosophy, Part I, 52; translation by Haldane and Ross. All 
quotations from Descartes are from this translation.* 

2 Meditation IV, towards the end. 

3 The word 'solidarity' has been borrowed from Professor Wildon Carr's Presi- 
dential Address to the Aristotelian Society, Session 1917-1918. The address — 
'The Interaction of Body and Mind" — develops the fundamental principle sug- 
gested by this word. 



Fact and Form 41 

operations, effecting a transition into subjectivity. They replace the 'neu- 
tral stuff' of certain realistic philosophers. An actual entity is a process, 
and is not describable in terms of the morphology of a 'stuff/ This use of 
the term 'feeling' has a close analogy to Alexander's 4 use of the term 
'enjoyment'; and has also some kinship with Bergson's use of the term 
'intuition; A near analogy is Locke's use of the term 'idea/ including 'ideas 
of particular things' (cf. his Essay, III, III, 2, 6, and 7). But the word 
'feeling/ as used in these lectures, is even more reminiscent of Descartes. 
For example: "Let it be so; still it is at least quite certain that it seems to 
me that I see light, that I hear noise and that I feel heat. That cannot be 
false; properly speaking it is what is in me called feeling (sentire); and 
used in this precise sense that is no other thing than thinking." 5 

In Cartesian language, the essence of an actual entity consists solely in 
the fact that it is a prehending thing (i.e., a substance whose whole essence 
or nature is to prehend). 6 A 'feeling' belongs to the positive species [66] of 
'prehensions.' There are two species of prehensions, the 'positive species' and 
the 'negative species.' An actual entity has a perfectly definite bond with 
each item in the universe. This determinate bond is its prehension of that 
item. A negative prehension is the definite exclusion of that item from 
positive contribution to the subject's own real internal constitution. This 
doctrine involves the position that a negative prehension expresses a 
bond. A positive prehension is the definite inclusion of that item into posi- 
tive contribution to the subject's own real internal constitution. This 
positive inclusion is called its 'feeling' of that item. Other entities are re- 
quired to express how any one item is felt. All actual entities in the actual 
world, relatively to a given actual entity as 'subject,' are necessarily 'felt' 
by that subject, though in general vaguely. An actual entity as felt is said 
to be 'objectified' for that subject. Only a selection of eternal objects are 
'felt' by a given subject, and these eternal objects are then said to have 
'ingression' in that subject. But those eternal objects which are not felt are 
not therefore negligible. For each negative prehension has its own sub- 
jective form, however trivial and faint. It adds to the emotional complex, 
though not to the objective data. The emotional complex is the subjective 
form of the final 'satisfaction.' The importance of negative prehensions 
arises from the fact, that (i) actual entities form a system, in the sense of 
entering into each other's constitutions, (ii) that by the ontological 
principle every entity is felt by some actual entity, (iii) that, as a conse- 
quence of (i) and (ii), every entity in the actual world of a concrescent 
actuality has some gradation of real relevance to that concrescence, (iv) 
that, in consequence of (iii), the negative prehension of an entity is a 

4 Cf. his Space, Time and Deity, passim. 

5 Meditation II, Haldane and Ross translation. 

6 For the analogue to this sentence cf. Meditation VI; substitute 'Ens pre- 
hendens" fort 'Ens cogitans. 7 



42 Discussions and Applications 

positive fact with its emotional subjective form,t (v) there is a mutual 
sensitivity of the subjective forms of prehensions, so that they are not in- 
different to each other, (vi) the concrescence issues in one concrete feel- 
ing, the satisfaction. 

SECTION II 

[67] That we fail to find in experience any elements intrinsically incapa- 
ble of exhibition as examples of general theoryt is the hope of rationalism. 
This hope is not a metaphysical premise. It is the faith which forms the 
motive for the pursuit of all sciences alike, including metaphysics. 

In so far as metaphysics enables us to apprehend the rationality of 
things, the claim is justified. It is always open to us, having regard to the 
imperfections of all metaphysical systems, to lose hope at the exact point 
where we find ourselves. The preservation of such faith must depend on an 
ultimate moral intuition into the nature of intellectual action— that it 
should embody the adventure of hope. Such an intuition marks the point 
where metaphysics— and indeed every science— gains assurance from reli- 
gion and passes over into religion. But in itself the faith does not embody a 
premise from which the theory starts: it is an ideal which is seeking satis- 
faction. In so far as we believe that doctrine, we are rationalists. 

There must, however, be limits to the claim that all the elements in 
the universe are explicable by 'theory/ For 'theory' itself requires that there 
be given' elements so as to form the material for theorizing. Plato himself 
recognizes this limitation: I quote from Professor A. E. Taylor's summary 
of the Timaeus: 

In the real world there is always, over and above "law," a factor of 
the "simply given" or "brute fact," not accounted for and to be ac- 
cepted simply as given. It is the business of science never to acquiesce 
in the merely given, to seek to "explain" it as the consequence, in virtue 
of rational law, of some simpler initial "given." But, however far sci- 
ence may carry this procedure, it is always forced to retain some ele- 
ment of brute fact, the merely given, in its account of things. It is the 
presence in nature of this element of the given, this surd or irrational 
as it has [68] sometimes been called, which Timaeus appears to be per- 
sonifying in his language about Necessity. 7 

So far as the interpretation of Plato is concerned, I rely upon the au- 
thority of Professor Taylor. But, apart from this historical question, a clear 
understanding of the 'given' elements in the world is essential for any form 
of Platonic realism. 

For rationalistic thought, the notion of 'givenness' carries with it a 
reference beyond the mere data in question. It refers to a 'decision' 
whereby what is 'given' is separated off from what for that occasion is 'not 

7 Plato, The Man and His Work, Lincoln MacVeagh, New York, 1927.* 



Fact and Form 43 

given/ This element of 'givenness' in things implies some activity pro- 
curing limitation. The word 'decision' does not here imply conscious judg- 
ment, though in some 'decisions' consciousness will be a factor. The word 
is used in its root sense of a 'cutting off/ The ontological principle declares 
that every decision is referable to one or more actual entities, because in 
separation from actual entities there is nothing, merely nonentity— 'The 
rest is silence/ 

The ontological principle asserts the relativity of decision; whereby every 
decision expresses the relation of the actual thing, for which a decision is 
made, to an actual thing by which that decision is made. But 'decision' 
cannot be construed as a casual adjunct of an actual entity. It constitutes 
the very meaning of actuality. An actual entity arises from decisions for it, 
and by its very existence provides decisions for other actual entities which 
supersede it. Thus the ontological principle is the first stage in constituting 
a theory embracing the notions of 'actual entity/ 'givenness,' and 'process/ 
Just as 'potentiality for process' is the meaning of the more general term 
'entity/ or 'thing; so 'decision' is the additional meaning imported by the 
word 'actual' into the phrase 'actual entity/ 'Actuality' is the decision 
amid 'potentiality/ It represents stubborn fact which cannot be evaded. 
The real internal constitution of an actual [69] entity progressively consti- 
tutes a decision conditioning the creativity which transcends that actuality. 
The Castle Rock at Edinburgh exists from moment to moment, and from 
century to century, by reason of the decision** effected by its own historic 
route of antecedent occasions. And if, in some vast upheaval of nature, it 
were shattered into fragments, that convulsion would still be conditioned 
by the fact that it was the destruction of that rock. The point to be empha- 
sized is the insistent particularity of things experienced and of the act of 
experiencing. Bradley's doctrine 8 — Wolf-eating-Lamb as a universal quali- 
fying the absolute— is a travesty of the evidence. That wolf eat* that lamb 
at that spot at that time: the wolf knew it; the lamb knew it; and the 
carrion birds knew it. Explicitly in the verbal sentence, or implicitly in the 
understanding of the subject entertaining it, every expression of a proposi- 
tion includes demonstrative elements. In fact each word, and each sym- 
bolic phrase, is such an element, exciting the conscious prehension of some 
entity belonging to one of the categories of existence. 

SECTION III 

Converselv. where there is no decision involving exclusion, there is no 
givenness. For example, the total multiplicity of Platonic forms is not 
'given/ But in respect of each actual entity, there is givenness of such 
forms . The determinate definiteness of each actuality is an expression of a 
selection from these forms. It grades them in a diversity of relevance. This 

8 Cf. Logic, Bk. I, Ch. II, Sect. 42. 



44 Discussions and Applications 

ordering of relevance starts from those forms which are, in the fullest 
sense, exemplified, and passes through grades of relevance down to those 
forms which in some faint sense are proximately relevant by reason of 
contrast with actual fact. This whole gamut of relevance is 'given/ and 
must be referred to the decision of actuality. 

The term 'Platonic form' has here been used as the [70] briefest way of 
indicating the entities in question. But these lectures are not an exegesis of 
Plato's writings; the entities in question are not necessarily restricted to 
those which he would recognize as 'forms/ Also the term 'idea' has a sub- 
jective suggestion in modern philosophy, which is very misleading for my 
present purposes; and in any case it has been used in many senses and has 
become ambiguous. The term 'essence/ as used by the Critical Realists, 
also suggests their use of it, which diverges from what I intend. Accord- 
ingly, by way of employing a term devoid of misleading suggestions, I use 
the phrase 'eternal object' for what in the preceding paragraph of this 
section I have termed a 'Platonic form/ Any entity whose conceptual rec- 
ognition does not involve a necessary reference to any definite actual en- 
tities of the temporal world is called an 'eternal object/ 

In this definition the 'conceptual recognition' must of course be an 
operation constituting a real feeling belonging to some actual entity. The 
point is that the actual subject which is merely conceiving the eternal ob- 
ject is not thereby in direct relationship to some other actual entity, apart 
from any other peculiarity in the composition of that conceiving subject. 
This doctrine applies also to thef primordial nature of God, which is his 
complete envisagement of eternal objects; he+ is not thereby directly related 
to the given course of history. The given course of history presupposes his 
primordial nature, but his primordial nature does not presuppose it. 

An eternal object is always a potentiality for actual entities; but in itself, 
as conceptually felt, it is neutral as to the fact of its physical ingression in 
any particular actual entity of the temporal world. 'Potentiality' is the cor- 
relative of 'givenness/ The meaning of 'givenness' is that what is 'given' 
* might not have been 'given'; and that what is not 'given' might have been 
'given.' 

Further, in the complete particular 'givenness' for an actual entity there 
is an element of exclusiveness. The [71] various primary data and the con- 
crescent feelings do not form a mere multiplicity. Their synthesis in the 
final unity of one actual entity is another fact of 'givenness.' The actual en- 
tity terminates its becoming in one complex feeling involving a completely 
determinate bond with every item in the universe, the bond being either a* 
positive or a negative prehension. This termination is the 'satisfaction' of 
the actual entity. Thus the addition of another component alters this 
synthetic 'givenness.' Any additional component is therefore contrary to 
this integral 'givenness' of the original. This principle may be illustrated by 
our visual perception of a picture. The pattern of colours is 'given' for us. 



Fact and Form 45 

But an extra patch of red does not constitute a mere addition; it alters the 
whole balance. Thus in an actual entity the balanced unity of the total 
'givenness' excludes anything that is not given. 

This is the doctrine of the emergent unity of the superject. An actual 
entity is to be conceived both as a subject presiding over its own immediacy 
of becoming, and a superject which is the atomic creature exercising its 
function of objective immortality. It has become a 'being'; and it belongs to 
the nature of every 'being' that it is a potential for every 'becoming.' 

This doctrine, that the final 'satisfaction' of an actual entity is intolerant 
of any addition, expresses the fact that every actual entity— since it is 
what it is— is finally its own reason for what it omits. In the real internal 
constitution of an actual entity there is always some element which is con- 
trary to an omitted element. Here 'contrary' means the impossibility of 
joint entry in the same sense. In other words, indetermination has evap- 
orated from 'satisfaction/ so that there is a complete determination of 
'feeling/ or of 'negation of feeling/ respecting the universe. This evapora- 
tion of indetermination is merely another way of considering the process 
whereby the actual entity arises from its data. Thus, in another sense, each 
actual entity includes the uni- \72] verse, by reason of its determinate atti- 
tude towards every element in the universe. 

Thus the process of becoming is dipolar, (i) by reason of its qualification 
by the determinateness of the actual world, and (ii) by its conceptual pre- 
hensions of the indeterminateness of eternal objects. The process is con- 
stituted by the influx of eternal objects into a novel determinateness of 
feeling which absorbs the actual world into a novel actuality. 

The 'formal' constitution of an actual entity is a process of transition 
from indetermination towards terminal determination. But the indetermi- 
nation is referent to determinate data. The 'objective 7 constitution of an* 
actual entity is its terminal determination, considered as a complex of com- 
ponent determinates by reason of which the actual entity is a datum for 
the creative advance. The actual entity on its physical side is composed of 
its determinate feelings of its actual world, and on its mental side is 
originated by its conceptual appetitions. 

Returning to the correlation of 'givenness' and 'potentiality/ we see that 
'givenness' refers to 'potentiality/ and 'potentiality' to 'givenness'; also we 
see that the completion of 'givenness' in actual fact converts the 'not-given' 
for that fact into 'impossibility' for that fact. The individuality of an actual 
entity involves an exclusive limitation. This element of 'exclusive limita- 
tion' is the definiteness essential for the synthetic unity of an actual entity. 
This synthetic unity forbids the notion of mere addition to the included 
elements. 

It is evident that 'givenness' and 'potentiality' are both meaningless apart 
from a multiplicity of potential entities. These potentialities are the 
'eternal objects.' Apart from 'potentiality' and 'givenness/ there can be no 



46 Discussions and Applications 

nexus of actual things in process of supersession by novel actual things. 
The alternative is a static monistic universe, without unrealized poten- 
tialities; since 'potentiality* is then a meaningless term. 

[73] The scope of the ontological principle is not exhausted by the corol- 
lary that 'decision 7 must be referable to an actual entity. Everything must 
be somewhere; and here "somewhere' means 'some actual entity/ Accord- 
ingly the general potentiality of the universe must be somewhere; since it 
retains its proximate relevance to actual entities for which it is unrealized. 
This 'proximate relevance' reappears in subsequent concrescence as final 
causation regulative of the emergence of novelty. This 'somewhere' is the 
non- temporal actual entity. Thus 'proximate relevance' means 'relevance 
as in the primordial mind of God.'t 

It is a contradiction in terms to assume that some explanatory fact can 
float into the actual world out of nonentity. Nonentity is nothingness. 
Every explanatory fact refers to the decision and to the efficacy* of an 
actual thing. The notion of 'subsistence' is merely the notion of how eternal 
objects can be components of the primordial nature of God. This is a 
question for subsequent discussion (cf. Part V). But eternal objects, as in 
God's primordial nature, constitute the Platonic world of ideas. 

There is not, however, one entity which is merely the class of all eternal 
objects. For if we conceive any class of eternal objects, there are additional 
eternal objects which presuppose that class but do not belong to it. For this 
reason, at the beginning of this section, the phrase 'the multiplicity of 
Platonic forms' was used, instead of the more natural phrase 'thet class of 
Platonic forms.' A multiplicity is a type of complex thing which has the 
unity derivative from some qualification which participates in each of its 
components severally; but a multiplicity has no unity derivative merely 
from its various components. 

SECTION IV 

The doctrine just stated— that every explanatory fact refers to the deci- 
sion and to the efficacy of an actual [74} thing— requires discussion in ref- 
erence to the ninth Categoreal Obligation. This category states that 'The 
concrescence of each individual actual entity is internally determined and 
is externally free.' 

The peculiarity of the course of history illustrates the joint relevance of 
the 'ontological principle' and of this categoreal obligation. The evolution 
of history can be rationalized by the consideration of the determination 
of successors by antecedents. But, on the other hand, the evolution of his- 
tory is incapable of rationalization because it exhibits a selected flux of 
participating forms. No reason, internal to history, can be assigned why 
that flux of forms, rather than another flux, should have been illustrated. 
It is true that any flux must exhibit the character of internal determina- 
tion. So much follows from the ontological principle. But every instance of 



Fact and Form 47 

internal determination assumes that flux up to that point. There is no 
reason why there could be no alternative flux exhibiting that principle of 
internal determination. The actual flux presents itself with the character 
of being merely 'given. 7 It does not disclose any peculiar character of 'per- 
fection. 7 On the contrary, the imperfection of the world is the theme of 
every religion which offers a way of escape, and of every sceptic who de- 
plores the prevailing superstition. The Leibnizian theory of the 'best of 
possible worlds 7 is an audacious fudge produced in order to save the face 
of a Creator constructed by contemporary, and antecedent, theologians. 
Further, in the case of those actualities whose immediate experience is 
most completely open to us, namely, human beings, the final decision of 
the immediate subject-superject, constituting the ultimate modification of 
subjective aim, is the foundation of our experience of responsibility, of ap- 
probation or of disapprobation, of self-approval or of self-reproach, of free- 
dom, of emphasis. This element in experience is too large to be put aside 
merely as misconstruction. It governs the whole tone of human life. It can 
be illustrated+ by striking [75] instances from fact or from fiction. But 
these instances are only conspicuous illustrations of human experience 
during each hour and each minute. The ultimate freedom of things, lying 
beyond all determinations, was whispered by Galileo— E pur si muove— 
freedom for the inquisitors to think wrongly, for Galileo to think rightly, 
and for the world to move in despite of Galileo and inquisitors. 

The doctrine of the philosophy of organism is that, however far the 
sphere of efficient causation be pushed in the determination of components 
of a concrescence— its data, its emotions, its appreciations, its purposes, its 
phases of subjective aim— beyond the determination of these components 
there always remains the final reaction of the self-creative unity of the 
universe. This final reaction completes the self-creative act by putting the 
decisive stamp of creative emphasis upon the determinations of efficient 
cause. Each occasion exhibits its measure of creative emphasis in propor- 
tion to its measure of subjective intensity. The absolute standard of such 
intensity is that of the primordial nature of God, which is neither great 
nor small because it arises out of no actual world. It has within it no com- 
ponents which are standards of comparison. But in the temporal world for 
occasions of relatively slight experient intensity, their decisions of creative 
emphasis are individually negligible compared to the determined com- 
ponents which they receive and transmit. But the final accumulation of all 
such decisions— the decision of God's nature and the decisions of all occa- 
sions—constitutes that special element in the flux of forms in history, which 
is given 7 and incapable of rationalization beyond the fact that within it 
every component which is determinable is internally determined. 

The doctrine is, that each concrescence is to be referred to a definite free 
initiation and a definite free conclusion. The initial fact is macrocosmic, in 
the sense of having equal relevance to all occasions; the final fact is micro- 



48 Discussions and Applications 

[76] cosmic, in the sense of being peculiar to that occasion. Neither fact is 
capable of rationalization, in the sense of tracing the antecedents which 
determine it. The initial fact is the primordial appetition, and the final fact 
is the decision of emphasis, finally creative of the 'satisfaction/ 

SECTION V 

The antithetical terms 'universals 7 and 'particulars' are the usual words 
employed to denote respectively entities which nearly, though not quite, 9 
correspond to the entities here termed 'eternal objects/ and 'actual en- 
tities. 7 These terms, 'universals 7 and 'particulars/ both in the suggestive- 
ness of the two words and in their current philosophical use, are somewhat 
misleading. The ontological principle, and the wider doctrine of universal 
relativity, on which the present metaphysical discussion is founded, blur 
the sharp distinction between what is universal and what is particular. The 
notion of a universal is of that which can enter into the description of many 
particulars; whereas the notion of a particular is that it is described by uni- 
versal, and does not itself enter into the description of any other particu- 
lar. According to the doctrine of relativity which is the basis of the meta- 
physical system of the present lectures, both these notions involve a mis- 
conception. An actual entity cannot be described, even inadequately, by 
universals; because other actual entities do enter into the description of 
any one actual entity. Thus every so-called 'universal 7 is particular in the 
sense of being just what it is, diverse from everything else; and every so- 
called 'particular 7 is universal in the sense of entering into the constitu- 
tions of other actual entities. The contrary opinion led to the collapse of 
Descartes 7 many substances into Spinoza's one substance; to Leibniz's 
windowless monads with their pre-established harmony; to the sceptical 
reduction of Hume's philosophy— a reduction first effected by Hume him- 
self, \77] and reissued with the most beautiful exposition by Santayana in 
his Scepticism and Animal Faith. 

The point is that the current view of universals and particulars inevitably 
leads to the epistemological position stated by Descartes: 

From this I should conclude that I knew the wax by means of vision 
and not simply by the intuition of the mind; unless by chance I re- 
member that, when looking from a window and saying I see men who 
pass in the street, I really do not see them, but infer that what I see 
is men, just as I say that I see wax. And yet what do I see from the 
window but hats and coats which may cover automatic machines? 
Yet I judge these to be men. And similarly solely by the faculty of 
judgment [judicandi] which rests in my mind, I comprehend that 
which I believed I saw with my eyes. 10 

9 For example, prehensions and subjective forms are also 'particulars.' 

10 Meditation II. 



Fact and Form 49 

In this passage it is assumed 1X that Descartes— the Ego in question— is a 
particular, characterized only by universals. Thus his impressions— to use 
Hume's word— are characterizations by universals. Thus there is no percep- 
tion of a particular actual entity. He arrives at the belief in the actual 
entity by 'the faculty of judgment. 7 But on this theory he has absolutely 
no analogy upon which to found any such inference with the faintest 
shred of probability. Hume, accepting Descartes' account of perception (in 
this passage), which also belongs to Locke in some sections of his Essay ; 
easily draws the sceptical conclusion. Santayana irrefutably exposes the 
full extent to which this scepticism must be carried. The philosophy of 
organism recurs to Descartes 7 alternative theory of 'realties objectiva,' and 
endeavours to interpret it in terms of a consistent ontology. Descartes en- 
deavoured to combine the two theories; but his unquestioned acceptance 
of the subject-predicate dogma forced him [78] into a representative theory 
of perception, involving a 'judicium 7 validated by our assurance of the 
power and the goodness of God. The philosophy of organism in its account 
of prehension takes its stand upon the Cartesian terms 'realitas objectiva, 7 
'inspection and Hntuitio. 7 The two latter terms are transformed into the 
notion of a 'positive prehension, 7 and into operations described in the 
various categories of physical and conceptual origination. A recurrence to 
the notion of 'God 7 is still necessary to mediate between physical and con- 
ceptual prehensions, but not in the crude form of giving a limited letter 
of credit to a 'judicium.' 

Hume, in effect, agrees that 'mind 7 is a process of concrescence arising 
from primary data. In his account, these data are 'impressions of sensa- 
tion 7 ; and in such impressions no elements other than universals are dis- 
coverable. For the philosophy of organism, the primary data are always 
actual entities absorbed into feeling in virtue of certain universals shared 
alike by the objectified actuality and the experient subject (cf. Part III). 
Descartes takes an intermediate position. He explains perception in Hu- 
mian terms, but adds an apprehension of particular actual entities in virtue 
of an Hnspectio 7 and a 'judicium 7 effected by the mind (Meditations II and 
IJJ).t Here he is paving the way for Kant, and for the degradation of the 
world into 'mere appearance.' 

AH modern philosophy hinges round the difficulty of describing the 
world in terms of subject and predicate, substance and quality, particular 
and universal. The result always does violence to that immediate experi- 
ence which we express in our actions, our hopes, our sympathies, our pur- 
poses, and which we enjoy in spite of our lack of phrases for its verbal 



11 Perhaps inconsistently with what Descartes says elsewhere: in other passages 
the mental activity involved seems to be analysis which discovers 'realitas ob- 
jectiva 7 as a component element of the idea in question. There is thus Hnspectio' 
rather than 'judicium. 7 



50 Discussions and Applications 

analysis. We find ourselves in a buzzing 12 world, amid a democracy of 
fellow creatures; whereas, under some disguise or other orthodox philoso- 
phy can only introduce us to solitary substances, each enjoying an illusory 
experience: "O Bottom, thou [79] art changed! what do I see on thee?' 7 * 
The endeavour to interpret experience in accordance with the overpowering 
deliverance of common senset must bring us back to some restatement of 
Platonic realism, modified so as to avoid the pitfalls which the philosophi- 
cal investigations of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries have dis- 
closed. 

The true point of divergence is the false notion suggested by the contrast 
between the natural meanings of the words 'particular' and 'universal/ The 
'particular 7 is thus conceived as being just its individual self with no neces- 
sary relevance to any other particular. It answers to Descartes 7 definition 
of substance: "And when we conceive of substance, we merely conceive an 
existent thing which requires nothing but itself in order to exist. 77 13 This 
definition is a true derivative from Aristotle's definition: A primary sub- 
stance is "neither asserted of a subject nor present in a subject. 77 14 We 
must add the title phrase of Descartes 7 The Second Meditation: "Of the 
Nature of the Human Mind; and that it is more easily known than the 
Body,' 7 together with his two statements: "... thought constitutes the 
nature of thinking substance,' 7 and "everything that we find in mind is 
but so many diverse forms of thinking. 77 15 This sequence of quotations 
exemplifies the set of presuppositions which led to Locke's empiricism and 
to Kant's critical philosophy— the two dominant influences from which 
modern thought is derived. This is the side of seventeenth-century philoso- 
phy which is here discarded. 

The principle of universal relativity directly traverses Aristotle's dictum, 
'A substancet is not present in a subject.' On the contrary, according to 
this principle an actual entity is present in other actual entities. In fact if 
we allow for degrees of relevance, and for negligible relevance, we must 
say that every actual entity is present in every other actual entity. The 
philosophy of organism [80] is mainly devoted to the task of making clear 
the notion of 'being present in another entity.' This phrase is here borrowed 
from Aristotle: it is not a fortunate phrase, and in subsequent discussion 
it will be replaced by the term 'objectification.' The Aristotelian phrase 
suggests the crude notion that one actual entity is added to another sim- 
pliciter. This is not what is meant. One role of the eternal objects is that 
they are those elements which express how any one actual entity is con- 
stituted by its synthesis of other actual entities, and how that actual entity 
develops from the primary dative phase into its own individual actual 

12 This epithet is, of course, borrowed from William James. 

13 Principles of Philosophy, Part I, 51.* 

14 Aristotle by W. D. Ross, Ch. II. 

15 Principles of Philosophy , Part I, 53. 



Fact and Form 51 

existence, involving its individual enjoyments and appetitions. An actual 
entity is concrete because it is such a particular concrescence of the 
universe. 

SECTION VI 

A short examination of Locke's Essay Concerning^ Human Under- 
standing will throw light on the presuppositions from which the philosophy 
of organism originates. These citations from Locke are valuable as clear 
statements of the obvious deliverances of common sense, expressed with 
their natural limitations. They cannot be bettered in their character of pre- 
sentations of facts which have to be accepted by any satisfactory system of 
philosophy. 

The first point to notice is that in some of his statements Locke comes 
very near to the explicit formulation of an organic philosophy of the type 
being developed here. It was only his failure to notice that his problem 
required a more drastic revision of traditional categories than that which 
he actually effected, that led to a vagueness of statement, and the intru- 
sion of inconsistent elements. It was this conservative, other side of Locke 
which led to his sceptical overthrow by Hume. In his turn. Hume (despite 
his explicit repudiation in his Treatise, Part I, Sect. VI) was a thorough 
conservative, and in his explanation of mentality and its content never 
moved away from the subject-predicate habits of thought [81] which had 
been impressed on the European mind by the overemphasis on Aristotle's 
logic during the long mediaeval period. In reference to this twist of mind, 
probably Aristotle was not an Aristotelian. But Hume's sceptical reduction 
of knowledge entirely depends (for its arguments) on the tacit presupposi- 
tion of the mind as subject and of its contents as predicates— a presuppo- 
sition which explicitly he repudiates. 

The merit of Locke's Essay Concerning^ Human Understanding is its 
adequacy, and not its consistency. He gives the most dispassionate descrip- 
tions of those various elements in experience which common sense never 
lets slip. Unfortunately he is hampered by inappropriate metaphysical 
categories which he never criticized. He should have widened the title 
of his book into 'An Essay Concerningt Experience/ His true topic is the 
analysis of the types of experience enjoyed by an actual entity. But this 
complete experience is nothing other than what the actual entity is in it- 
self, for itself. I will adopt the pre-Kantian phraseology, and say that the 
experience enjoyed by an actual entity is that entity formaliter. By this I 
mean that the entity, when considered 'formally,' is being described in re- 
spect to those forms of its constitution whereby it is that individual entity 
with its own measure of absolute self-realization. Its 'ideas of things' are 
what other things are for it. In the phraseology of these lectures, they are 
its 'feelings.' The actual entity is composite and analysable; and its 'ideas' 
express how, and in what sense, other things are components in its own 



52 Discussions and Applications 

constitution. Thus the form of its constitution is to be found by an analy- 
sis of the Lockian ideas. Locke talks of 'understanding 7 and 'perception/ 
He should have started with a more general neutral term to express the 
synthetic concrescence whereby the many things of the universe become 
the one actual entity. Accordingly I have adopted the term 'prehension/ 
to express the activity whereby an actual entity effects its own concretion 
of other things. 

[82] The 'prehension 7 of one actual entity by another actual entity is the 
complete transaction, analysable into the objectification of the former 
entity as one of the data for the latter, and into the fully clothed feeling 
whereby the datum is absorbed into the subjective satisfaction— 'clothed 7 
with the various elements of its 'subjective form. 7 But this definition can be 
stated more generally so as to include the case of the prehension of an 
eternal object by an actual entity; namely, The 'positive prehension 7 of an 
entity by an actual entity is the complete transaction analysable into the 
ingression, or objectification, of that entity as a datum for feeling, and 
into the feeling whereby this datum is absorbed into the subjective satis- 
faction. I also discard Locke's term 'idea. 7 Instead of that term, the other 
things, in their limited r61es as elements for the actual entity in question, 
are called 'objects 7 for that thing. There are four main types of objects, 
namely, 'eternal objects, 7 'propositions, 7 'objectified 7 actual entities and 
nexus. These 'eternal objects 7 are Locke's ideas as explained in his Essay 
(II, I, l),t where he writes: 
Idea is the object of thinking. — Every man being conscious to himself 
that he thinks, and that which his mind is applied about, whilst think- 
ing, being the ideas that are there, it is past doubt that men have in 
their mind several ideas, such as aret those expressed by the words, 
"whiteness, hardness, sweetness, thinking, motion, man, elephant, army, 
drunkenness, 77 and others. 
But latert (III, III, 2), when discussing general terms (and subcon- 
sciously, earlier in his discussion of 'substance 7 in II, XXIII), he adds par- 
enthetically another type of ideas which are practically what I term 'ob- 
jectified actual entities' and 'nexus. 7 He calls them 'ideas of particular 
things 7 ; and he explains why, in general, such ideas cannot have their 
separate names. The reason is simple and undeniable: there are too many 
actual entities. He writes: "But it is beyond the power of human capacity 
to frame and retain distinct ideas of all the particular things we meet with: 
every bird and beast men saw, [83] every tree and plant that affected the 
senses, could not find a place in the most capacious understanding. 77 The 
context shows that it is not the impossibility of an 'idea 7 of any particular 
thing which is the seat of the difficulty; it is solely their number. This no- 
tion of a direct 'idea' (or 'feeling') of an actual entity is a presupposition of 
all common sense; Santayana ascribes it to 'animal faith. 7 But it accords 
very ill with the sensationalist theory of knowledge which can be derived 



Fact and Form 53 

from other parts of Locke's writings. Both Locke and Descartes wrestle 
with exactly the same difficulty. 

The principle that I am adopting is that consciousness presupposes ex- 
perience, and not experience consciousness. It is a special element in the 
subjective forms of some feelings. Thus an actual entity may, or may not, 
be conscious of some part of its experience. Its experience is its complete 
formal constitution, including its consciousness, if any. Thus, in Locke's 
phraseology, its 'ideas of particular things' are those other things exercising 
their function as felt components of its constitution. Locke would only term 
them 'ideas' when these objectifications belong to that region of experience 
lit up by consciousness. In Section 4t of the same chapter, he definitely 
makes all knowledge to be "founded in particular things. 77 He writes: 
". . . yet a distinct name for every particular thing would not be of any 
great use for the improvement of knowledge: which, though founded in 
particular things, 1 * enlarges itself by general views; to which things reduced 
into sortst under general names, are properly subservient/ 7 Thus for Locke, 
in this passage, there are not first the qualities and then the conjectural 
particular things; but conversely. Also he illustrates his meaning of a 'par- 
ticular thing' by a leaf/ a 'crow, 7 a 'sheep, 7 a 'grain of sand. 7 So he is not 
thinking of a particular patch of colour, or other sense-datum. 17 For ex- 
ample, [84] in Section 7 of the same chapter, in reference to children he 
writes: "The ideas of the nurse and the mother are well framed in their 
minds; and, like pictures of them there, represent only those individuals. 77 
This doctrine of Locke's must be compared with Descartes' doctrine of 
'realitas objectiva. 7 Locke inherited the dualistic separation of mind from 
body. If he had started with the one fundamental notion of an actual en- 
tity, '.he complex of ideas disclosed in consciousness would have at once 
turned into the complex constitution of the actual entity disclosed in its 
own consciousness, so far as it is conscious— fitfully, partially, or not at all. 
Locke definitely states how ideas become general. In Section 6 of the 
chapter he writes: ". . . and ideas become general by separating from 
them the circumstances of time, and place, and any other ideas that may 
determine them to this or that particular existence." Thus for Locke the 
abstract idea is preceded by the 'idea of a particular existent'; "[children] 
frame an idea which they find those many particulars do partake in. 7 ' This 
statement of Locke's should be compared with the Category of Con- 
ceptual Valuation, which is the fourth categoreal obligation. 

Locke discusses the constitution of actual things under the term 'real 
essences.' He writes (Section 15,t same chapter): "And thus the real in- 

16 My italics. 

17 As he is in I, II, 1 5, where he writes, "The senses at first let in particular 
ideas, and furnish the yet empty cabinet; . . ." Note the distinction between 
'particular ideas' and 'ideas of particular things/ 



54 Discussions and Applications 

ternal (but generally in substances unknown) constitution of things, 
whereon their discoverable qualities depend, may be called their 'essence/ " 
The point is that Locke entirely endorses the doctrine that an actual entity 
arises out of a complex constitution involving other entities, though, t by 
his unfortunate use of such terms as 'cabinet/ he puts less emphasis on the 
notion of 'process 7 than does Hume. 

Locke has in fact stated in his work one main problem for the philosophy 
of organism. He discovers that the mind is a unity arising out of the active 
prehension of ideas into one concrete thing. Unfortunately, he presup- 
poses both the Cartesian dualism whereby minds are one kind of par- 
ticulars, and natural entities are another kind [85] of particulars, and also 
the subject-predicate dogma. He is thus, in company with Descartes, driven 
to a theory of representative perception. For example, in one of the quota- 
tions already cited,t he writes: "and, like pictures of them there, represent 
only those individuals. 77 This doctrine obviously creates an insoluble prob- 
lem for epistemology, only to be solved either by some sturdy make-believe 
of 'animal faith, 7 with Santayana, or by some doctrine of illusorinesst— 
some doctrine of mere appearance, inconsistent if taken as real — with 
Bradley. Anyhow 'representative perception 7 can never, within its own 
metaphysical doctrines, produce the title deeds to guarantee the validity of 
the representation of fact by idea. 

Locke and the philosophers of his epoch— the seventeenth and eigh- 
teenth centuries— are misled by one fundamental misconception. It is the 
assumption, unconscious and uncriticized, that logical simplicity can be 
identified with priority in the process constituting an experient occasion. 
Locke founded the first two books of his Essay on this presupposition, with 
thet exception of his early sections on 'substance, 7 which are quoted imme- 
diately below. In the third and fourth books of the Essay he abandons this 
presupposition, again unconsciously as it seems. 

This identification of priority in logic with priority in practice has 
vitiated thought and procedure from the first discovery of mathematics and 
logic by the Greeks. For example, some of the worst defects in educational 
procedure have been due to it. Locke's nearest approach to the philosophy 
of organism, and— from the point of view of that doctrine— his main over- 
sight, are best exemplified by the first section of his chapter, 'Of our Com- 
plex Ideas of Substances 7 (II, XXIII, 1). He writes: 

The mind, being, as I have declared, furnished with a great number 
of the simple ideas conveyed in by the senses, as they are found in 
exterior things, or by reflection on its own operations, takes notice, 
also, that a certain number of these simple ideas go constantly to- 
gether; [86] which being presumed to belong to one thing, and words 
being suited to common apprehensions, and made use of for quick dis- 
patch, are called, so united in one subject, by one name; which, by in- 
advertency, we are apt afterward to talk of and consider as one simple 
idea, which indeed is a complication of many ideas together: because, 



Fact and Form 55 

as I have said, not imagining how these simple ideas can subsist by 
themselves, we accustom ourselves to suppose some substratum 
wherein they do subsist, and from which they do result; which there- 
fore we call "substance/' 

In this section, Locke's first statement, which is the basis of the re- 
mainder of the section, is exactly the primary assumption of the philosophy 
of organism: "The mind, being . . . furnished with a great number of the 
simple ideas conveyed in by the senses, as they are found in exterior 
things, . . ." Here the last phrase, 'as they are found in exterior things/ 
asserted what later I shall call the vector character of the primary feelings. 
The universals involved obtain that status by reason of the fact that 'they 
are found in exterior things' This is Locke's assertion and it is the assertion 
of the philosophy of organism. It can also be conceived as a development 
of Descartes' doctrine of 'realitas objectiva. 7 The universals are the only 
elements in the data describable by concepts, because concepts are merely 
the analytic functioning of universals. But the 'exterior things/ although 
they are not expressible by concepts in respect to their individual particu- 
larity, are no less data for feeling; so that the concrescent actuality arises 
from feeling their status of individual particularity; and thus that particu- 
larity is included as an element from which feelings originate, and which 
they concern. 

The sentence later proceeds with, "a certain number of these simple 
ideas go constantly together." This can only mean that in the immediate 
perception 'a certain number of these simple ideas' are found together in an 
exterior thing, and that the recollection of antecedent moments of experi- 
ence discloses that the same fact, of [87] togetherness in an exterior thing, 
holds for the same set of simple ideas. Again, the philosophy of organism 
agrees that this description is true for moments of immediate experience. 
But Locke, owing to the fact that he veils his second premise under the 
phrase 'go constantly together,' omits to consider the question whether the 
'exterior things' of the successive moments are to be identified. 

The answer of the philosophy of organism is that, in the sense in which 
Locke is here speaking, the exterior things of successive moments are not 
to be identified with each other. Each exterior thing is either one actual 
entity, or (more frequently) is a nexus of actual entities with imme- 
diacies mutually contemporary. For the sake of simplicity we will speak 
only of the simpler case where the 'exterior thing' means one actual entity 
at the moment in question. But what Locke is explicitly concerned with is 
the notion of the self-identity of the one enduring physical body which lasts 
for years, or for seconds, or for ages. He is considering the current philo- 
sophical notion of an individualized particular substance (in the Aristot- 
elian sense) which undergoes adventures of change, retaining its substantial 
form amid transition oft accidents. Throughout his Essay, he in effect re- 
tains this notion while rightly insisting on its vagueness and obscurity. The 
philosophy of organism agrees with Locke and Hume, that the non-in- 



56 Discussions and Applications 

dividualized substantial form is nothing else than the collectiqn of uni- 
versal— or ? more accurately, the one complex universal— common to the 
succession of 'exterior things' at successive moments respectively. In other 
words, an 'exterior thing' is either one 'actual entity/ or is a 'society' with a 
'defining characteristic' For the organic philosophy, these 'exterior things' 
(in the former sense) are the final concrete actualities. The individualized 
substance (of Locke) must be construed to be the historic route constituted 
by some society of fundamental 'exterior things,' stretching from the first 
'thing' to the last 'thing/ 

[88] But Locke, throughout his Essay, rightly insists that the chief ingre- 
dient in the notion of 'substance' is the notion of 'power/ The philosophy 
of organism holds that,t in order to understand 'power/ we must have a 
correct notion of how each individual actual entity contributes to the 
datum from which its successors arise and to which they must conform. 
The reason why the doctrine of power is peculiarly relevant to the en- 
during things, which the philosophy of Locke's day conceived as individual- 
ized substances, is that any likeness between the successive occasions of 
at historic route procures a corresponding identity between their contribu- 
tions to the datum of any subsequent actual entity; and it therefore secures 
a corresponding intensification in the imposition of conformity. The princi- 
ple is the same as that which holds for the more sporadic occasions in 
empty space; but the uniformity along the historic route increases the de- 
gree of conformity which that route exacts from the future. In particular 
each historic route of like occasions tends to prolong itself, by reason of the 
weight of uniform inheritance derivable from its members. The philosophy 
of organism abolishes the detached mind. Mental activity is one of the 
modes of feeling belonging to all actual entities in some degree, but only 
amounting to conscious intellectuality in some actual entities. This higher 
grade of mental activity is the intellectual self analysis of the entity in an 
earlier stage of incompletion, effected by intellectual feelings produced in 
a later stage of concrescence. 18 

The perceptive constitution of the actual entity presents the problem, 
How can the other actual entities, each with its own formal existence, also 
enter objectively into the perceptive constitution of the actual entity in 
question? This is the problem of the solidarity of the universe. The classical 
doctrines of universals and particulars, of subject and predicate, of individ- 
ual substances not present in other individual substances, of [89] the exter- 
nality of relations, alike render this problem incapable of solution. The 
answer given by the organic philosophy is the doctrine of prehensions, in- 
volved in concrescent integrations, and terminating in a definite, complex 
unity of feeling. To be actual must mean that all actual things are alike ob- 
jects, enjoying objective immortality in fashioning creative actions; and 
that all actual things are subjects, each prehending the universe from which 

18 Cf. Part III, Ch. V. 



Fact and Form 57 

it arises. The creative action is the universe always becoming one in a par- 
ticular unity of self-experience, and thereby adding to the multiplicity 
which is the universe as many. This insistent concrescence into unity is 
the outcome of the ultimate self-identity of each entity. No entity— be it 
'universal' or 'particular'— can play disjoined roles. Self-identity requires 
that every entity have one conjoined, self-consistent function, whatever be 
the complexity of that function. 

SECTION VII 

There is another side of Locke, which is his doctrine of power/ This 
doctrine is a better illustration of his admirable adequacy than of his con- 
sistency; there is no escape from Hume's demonstration that no such doc- 
trine is compatible with a purely sensationalist philosophy. The establish- 
ment of such a philosophy, though derivative from Locke, was not his 
explicit purpose. Every philosophical school in the course of its history 
requires two presiding philosophers. One of them under the influence of 
the main doctrines of the school should survey experience with some ade- 
quacy, but inconsistently. The other philosopher should reduce the doc- 
trines of the school to a rigid consistency; he will thereby effect a reductio 
ad absurdum. No school of thought has performed its full service to 
philosophy until these men have appeared. In this way the school of sensa- 
tionalist empiricism derives its importance from Locke and Hume. 

Locke introduces his doctrine of 'power' as follows (II, XXI, L3t)* 

This idea how got.— The mind being [90] every day informed, by 
the senses, of the alteration of those simple ideas it observes in things 
without, and taking notice how one comes to an end and ceases to 
be, and another begins to exist which was not before; reflecting also on 
what passes within itself, and observing a constant change of its ideas, 
sometimes by the impression of outward objects on the senses, and 
sometimes by the determination of its own choice; and concluding, 
from what it has so constantly observed to have been, that the like 
changes will for the future be made in the same things! by like agents, 
and by the like ways; considers in one thing the possibility of having 
any of its simple ideas changed, and in another the possibility of 
making that change; and so comes by that idea which we call "power." 
Thus we say, fire has a power to melt gold; . . . and gold has a power 
to be melted: ... In which and thet like cases, the power we con- 
sider is in reference to the change of perceivable ideas: for we cannot 
observe any alteration to be made in, or operation upon, any thing, 
but by the observable change of its sensible ideas; nor conceive any 
alteration to be made, but by conceiving a change of some of its 
ideas. . . .* Power thus considered is twofold; viz. as able to make, or 
able to receive, any change: the one may be called "active," and the 
other "passive," power. . . .* I confess power includes in it some kind 



58 Discussions and Applications 

of relation,— a relation to action or change; as, indeed, which of our 
ideas, of what kind soever, when attentively considered, does not? 
For our ideas of extension, duration, and number, do they not all 
contain in them a secret relation of the parts? Figure and motion have 
something relative in them much more visibly. And sensible qualities, 
as colours and smells, etc., what are they but the powers of different 
bodies in relation to our perception? . . . Our idea therefore of power, 
I think, may well have a place amongst other simple ideas, and be 
considered as one of them, being one of those that make a principal 
ingredient in our complex ideas of substances, as we shall hereafter 
have occasion to observe. 

[91] In this important passage, Locke enunciates the main doctrines of 
the philosophy of organism, namely: the principle of relativity; the rela- 
tional character of eternal objects, whereby they constitute the forms of 
the objectifications of actual entities for each other; the composite char- 
acter of an actual entity (i.e., a substance); the notion of 'power' as making 
a principal ingredient in that of actual entity (substance). In this latter 
notion, Locke adumbrates both the ontological principle, and also the 
principle that the 'power' of one actual entity on the other is simply how 
the former is objectified in the constitution of the other. Thus the prob- 
lem of perception and the problem of power are one and the same, at least 
so far as perception is reduced to mere prehension of actual entities. Per- 
ception, in the sense of consciousness of such prehension, requires the ad- 
ditional factor of the conceptual prehension of eternal objects, and a pro- 
cess of integration of the two factors (cf. Part III). 

Locke's doctrine of 'power' is reproduced in the philosophy of organism 
by the doctrine of the two types of objectification, namely, (a) 'causal 
objectification,' and (p) 'presentational objectification.' 

In 'causal objectification' what is felt subjectively by the objectified ac- 
tual entity is transmitted objectively to the concrescent actualities which 
supersede it. In Locke's phraseology the objectified actual entity is then 
exerting 'power.' In this type of objectification the eternal objects, rela- 
tional between object and subject, express the formal constitution of the 
objectified actual entity. 

In 'presentational objectification' the relational eternal objects fall into 
two sets, one set contributed by the 'extensive' perspective of the perceived 
from the position of the perceiver, and the other set by the antecedent con- 
crescent phases of the perceiver. What is ordinarily termed 'perception' is 
consciousness of presentational objectification. But according to the phi- 
losophy of organism there can be consciousness of both types of objectifi- 
cation. There can be such consciousness of both [92] types because, ac- 
cording to this philosophy, the knowable is the complete nature of the 
knower, at least such phases of it as are antecedent to that operation of 
knowing. 

Locke misses one essential doctrine, namely, that the doctrine of interna 1 



Fact and Form 59 

relations makes it impossible to attribute 'change 7 to any actual entity. 
Every actual entity is what it is, and is with its definite status in the 
universe, determined by its internal relations to other actual entities. 
'Change' is the description of the adventures of eternal objects in the 
evolving universe of actual things. 

The doctrine of internal relations introduces another consideration 
which cannot be overlooked without error. Locke considers the 'real es- 
sence' and the 'nominal essence' of things. But on the theory of the gen- 
eral relativity of actual things between each other, and of the internality of 
these relations, there are two distinct notions hidden under the term 'real 
essence/ both of importance. Locke writes (III, III, 15) : 
Essence may be taken for the being of any thing, whereby it is what it 
is. And thus the real internal (but generally in substances unknown) 
constitution of things, whereon their discoverable qualities depend, 
may be called their "essence/ 7 ... It is true, there is ordinarily supposed 
a real constitution of the sorts of things: and it is past doubt there 
must be some real constitution, on which any collection of simple 
ideas co-existing must depend. But it being evident that things are 
ranked under names into sorts or species only as they agree to certain 
abstract ideas to which we have annexed those t names, the essence of 
each genus or sort comes to be nothing but that abstract idea, which 
the general or "sortal" (if I may have leave so to call it from "sort," as I 
do "general" from genus) name stands for. And thist we shall find to 
be that which the word "essence" imparts in its mostt familiar use. 
These two sorts of essences, I suppose, may not unfitly be termed, the 
one the "real," the other the "nominal," essence. 

[93] The fundamental notion of the philosophy of organism is expressed 
in Locke's phrase, "it is past doubt there must be some real constitution, 
on which any collection of simple ideas co-existing must depend." Locke 
makes it plain (cf. II, II, 1) that by a 'simple idea' he means the ingression 
in the actual entity (illustrated by 'a piece of wax/ 'a piece of ice/ 'a rose') 
of some abstract quality which is not complex (illustrated by 'softness/ 
'warmth/ 'whiteness') . For Locke such simple ideas, coexisting^ in an actual 
entity, require a real constitution for that entity. Now in the philosophy of 
organism, passing beyond Locke's explicit statement, the notion of a real 
constitution is taken to mean that the eternal objects function by intro- 
ducing the multiplicity of actual entities as constitutive of the actual en- 
tity in question. Thus the constitution is 'real' because it assigns its status 
in the real world to the actual entity. In other words the actual entity, in 
virtue of being what it is, is also where it is. It is somewhere because it is 
some actual thing with its correlated actual world. This is the direct denial 
of the Cartesian doctrine, ". . . an existent thing which requires nothing 
but itself in order to exist." It is also inconsistent with Aristotle's phrase, 
"neither asserted of a subject nor present in a subject." 
I am certainly not maintaining that Locke grasped explicitly the impli- 



60 Discussions and Applications 

cations of his words as thus developed for the philosophy of organism. 
But it is a short step from a careless phrase to a flash of insight; nor is it un- 
believable that Locke saw further into metaphysical problems than some 
of his followers. But abandoning the question of what Locke had in his 
own mind, the 'organic doctrine' demands a 'real essence 7 in the sense of a 
complete analysis of the relations, and inter-relations of the actual entities 
which are formative of the actual entity in question, and an 'abstract es- 
sence' in which the specified actual entities are replaced by the notions of 
unspecified entities in such a combination: this is the notion of an un- 
specified actual entity. Thus the real [94] essence involves real objectifica- 
tions of specified actual entities; the abstract essence is a complex eternal 
object. There is nothing self-contradictory in the thought of many actual 
entities with the same abstract essence; but there can only be one actual 
entity with the same real essence. For the real essence indicates 'where' 
the entity is, that is to say, its status in the real world; the abstract essence 
omits the particularity of the status. 

The philosophy of organism in its appeal to the facts can thus support 
itself by an appeal to the insight of John Locke, who in British philosophy 
is the analogue to Plato, in the epoch of his life, in personal endowments, 
in width of experience, and in dispassionate statement of conflicting 
intuitions. 

This doctrine of organism is the attempt to describe the world as a 
process of generation of individual actual entities, each with its own ab- 
solute self-attainment. This concrete finality of the individual is nothing 
else than a decision referent beyond itself. The 'perpetual perishing' (cf. 
Locke, II, XIV, It) of individual absoluteness is thus foredoomed. But the 
'perishing' of absoluteness is the attainment of 'objective immortality.' 
This last conception expresses the further element in the doctrine of or- 
ganism—that the process of generation is to be described in terms of actual 
entities. 



CHAPTER II 
THE EXTENSIVE CONTINUUM 

SECTION I 

[95] We must first consider the perceptive mode in which there is clear, 
distinct consciousness of the 'extensive' relations of the world. These rela- 
tions include the 'extensiveness' of space and the 'extensiveness' of time. 
Undoubtedly, this clarity, at least in regard to space, is obtained only in 
ordinary perception through the senses. This mode of perception is here 
termed 'presentational immediacy/ In this 'mode' the contemporary world 
is consciously prehended as a continuum of extensive relations. 

It cannot be too clearly understood that some chief notions of European 
thought were framed under the influence of a misapprehension, only par- 
tially corrected by the scientific progress of the last century. This mistake 
consists in the confusion of mere potentiality with actuality. Continuity 
concerns what is potential; whereas actuality is incurably atomic. 

This misapprehension is promoted by the neglect of the principle that, 
so far as physicalt relations are concerned, contemporary events happen in 
causal independence of each other. 1 This principle will have to be ex- 
plained later, in connection with an examination of process and of time. It 
receives an exemplification in the character of our perception of the world 
of contemporary actual entities. That contemporary world is objectified 
[96] for us as 'realitas objectiva, 7 illustrating bare extension with its various 
parts discriminated by differences of sense-data, t These qualities, such as 
colours, sounds, bodily feelings, tastes, smells, together with the perspec- 
tives introduced by extensive relationships, are the relational eternal ob- 
jects whereby the contemporary actual entities are elements in our consti- 
tution. This is the type of objectification which (in Sect. VII of the 
previous chapter) has been termed 'presentational objectification.' 

In this way, by reason of the principle of contemporary independence, 
the contemporary world is objectified for us under the aspect of passive 
potentiality. The very sense-data by which its parts are differentiated are 
supplied by antecedent states of our own bodies, and so is their distribution 
in contemporary space. Our direct perception of the contemporary world 
is thus reduced to extension, defining (i) our own geometrical perspectives, 
and (ii) possibilities of mutual perspectives for other contemporary entities 

1 This principle lies on the surface of the fundamental Einsteinian formula for 
the physical continuum. 

61 



62 Discussions and Applications 

inter se, and (iii) possibilities of division. These possibilities of division con- 
stitute the external world a continuum. For a continuum is divisible; so 
far as the contemporary world is divided by actual entities, it is not a con- 
tinuum, but is atomic. Thus the contemporary world is perceived with its 
potentiality for extensive division, and not in its actual atomic division. 

The contemporary world as perceived by the senses is the datum for 
contemporary actuality, and is therefore continuous— divisible but not 
divided. The contemporary world is in fact divided and atomic, being a 
multiplicity of definite actual entities. These contemporary actual entities 
are divided from each other, and are not themselves divisible into other 
contemporary actual entities. This antithesis will have to be discussed later 
(cf. Part IV). But it is necessary to adumbrate it here. 

This limitation of the way in which the contemporary actual entities are 
relevant to the 'formal' existence of the subject in question is the first 
example of the general [97] principle, that objectification relegates into ir- 
relevance, or into a subordinate relevance, the full constitution of the ob- 
jectified entity. Some real component in the objectified entity assumes the 
r61e of being how that particular entity is a datum in the experience of the 
subject. In this case, the objectified contemporaries are only directly rele- 
vant to the subject in their character of arising from a datum which is an 
extensive continuum. They do, in fact, atomize this continuum; but the 
aboriginal potentiality, which they include and realize, is what they con- 
tribute as the relevant factor in their objectifications. They thus exhibit the 
community of contemporary actualities as a common world with mathe- 
matical relations— where the term 'mathematical' is used in the sense in 
which it would have been understood by Plato, Euclid, and Descartes, 
before the modern discovery of the true definition of pure mathematics. 

The bare mathematical potentialities of the extensive continuum re- 
quire an additional content in order to assume the role of real objects for 
the subject. This content is supplied by the eternal objects t termed sense- 
data. These objects are 'given' for the experience of the subject. Their 
givenness does not arise from the 'decision' of the contemporary entities 
which are thus objectified. It arises from the functioning of the antecedent 
physical body of the subject; and this functioning can in its turn be ana- 
lysed as representing the influence of the more remote past, a past com- 
mon alike to the subject and to its contemporary actual entities. Thus 
these sense-data are eternal objects playing a complex relational role; 
they connect the actual entities of the past with the actual entities of the 
contemporary world, and thereby effect objectifications of the contem- 
porary things and of the past things. For instance, we see the contemporary 
chair, but we see it with our eyes; and we touch the contemporary chair, 
but we touch it with our hands. Thus colours objectify the chair in one 
way, and objectify the eyes in another way, as elements in the experience 
of the subject. [95] Also touch objectifies the chair in one way, and ob- 



The Extensive Continuum 63 

jectifies the hands in another way, as elements in the experience of the 
subject. But the eyes and the hands are in the past (the almost immediate 
past) and the chair is in the present The chair, thus objectified, is the 
objectification of a contemporary nexus of actual entities in its unity as one 
nexus. This nexus is illustrated as to its constitution by the spatial region, 
with its perspective relations. This region is, in fact, atomized by the mem- 
bers of the nexus. By the operation of the Category of Transmutation (cf. 
Parts III and IV), in the objectification an abstraction is made from the 
multiplicity of members and from all components of their formal consti- 
tutions, except the occupation of this region. This prehension, in the 
particular example considered, will be termed the prehension of a 'chair- 
image/ Also the intervention of the past is not confined to antecedent eyes 
and hands. There is a more remote past throughout nature external to the 
body. The direct relevance of this remote past, relevant by reason of its 
direct objectification in the immediate subject, is practically negligible, so 
far as concerns prehensions of a strictly physical type. 

But external nature has an indirect relevance by the transmission 
through it of analogous prehensions. In this way there are in it various 
historical routes of intermediate objectifications. Such relevant historical 
routes lead up to various parts of the animal body, and transmit into it 
prehensions which form the physical influence of the external environment 
on the animal body. But this external environment which is in the past of 
the concrescent subject is also, with negligible exceptions, in the past of 
the nexus which is the objectified chair-image. If there be a 'real chair/ 
there will be another historical route of objectifications from nexus to 
nexus in this environment. The members of each nexus will be mutually 
contemporaries. Also the historical route will lead up to the nexus which 
is the chair-image. The complete nexus, composed of this historical route 
and the [99] chair-image, will form a 'corpuscular' society. This society is 
the 'real chair/ 

The prehensions of the concrescent subject and the formal constitutions 
of the members of the contemporary nexus which is the chair-image are 
thus conditioned by the properties of the same environment in the past. 
The animal body is so constructed that, with rough accuracy and in 
normal conditions, important emphasis is thus laid upon those regions in 
the contemporary world which are particularly relevant for the future 
existence of the enduring object of which the immediate percipient is one 
occasion. 

A reference to the Category of Transmutation will show that perception 
of contemporary 'images 7 in the mode of 'presentational immediacy' is an 
'impure' prehension. The subsidiary 'pure 7 physical prehensions are the 
components which provide some definite information as to the physical 
world; the subsidiary 'pure 7 mental prehensions are the components by 
reason of which the theory of 'secondary qualities 7 was introduced into the 



64 Discussions and Applications 

theory of perception. The account here given traces back these secondary 
qualities to their root in physical prehensions expressed by the 'wiihness of 
the body/ 

If the familiar correlations between physical paths and the life-histories 
of a chair and of the animal body are not satisfied, we are apt to say that 
our perceptions are delusive. The word 'delusive'" is all very well as a tech- 
nical term; but it must not be misconstrued to mean that what we have 
directly perceived, we have not directly perceived. Our direct perception, 
via our senses, of an immediate extensive shape, in a certain geometrical 
perspective to ourselves, and in certain general geometrical relations to the 
contemporary world, remains an ultimate fact. Our inferences are at fault. 
In Cartesian phraseology, it is a final 'inspectio' (also termed Hntuitio') 
which, when purged of all 'judicium— i.e., of 'inference — is final for belief. 
This whole question of 'delusive' perception must be considered later (cf. 
Part III, Chs. Ill to V) in more [100] detail. We can, however, see at once 
that there are grades of 'delusiveness.' There is the non-delusive case, when 
we see a chair-image and there is a chair. There is the partially delusive case 
when we have been looking in a mirror; in this case, the chair-image we 
see is not the culmination of the corpuscular society of entities which we 
call the real chair. Finally, we may have been taking drugs, so that the 
chair-image we see has no familiar counterpart in any historical route of a 
corpuscular society. Also there are other delusive grades where the lapse of 
time is the main element. These cases are illustrated by our perceptions of 
the heavenly bodies. In delusive cases we are apt, in a confusing way, to 
say that the societies of entities which we did not see but correctly inferred 
are the things that we 'really' saw. 

The conclusion of this discussion is that the ingression of the eternal 
objects termed 'sense-data' t into the experience of a subject cannot be 
construed as the simple objectification of the actual entity to which, in- 
ordinary speech, we ascribe that sense-datum as a quality. The ingression 
involves a complex relationship, whereby the sense-datum emerges as the 
'given' eternal object by which some past entities are objectified (for ex- 
ample, colour seen with the eyes and bad temper inherited from the 
viscera) and whereby the sense-datum also enters into the objectification 
of a society of actual entities in the contemporary world. Thus a sense- 
datum has ingression into experience by reason of its forming the what of 
a very complex multiple integration of prehensions within that occasion. 
For example, the ingression of a visual sense-datum involves the causal 
objectification of various antecedent bodily organs and the presentational 
objectification of the shape seen, this shape being a nexus of contemporary 
actual entities. In this account of the ingression of sense-data, the animal 
body is nothing more than the most intimately relevant part of the ante- 
cedent settled world. To sum up this account: When we perceive a con- 
temporary extended shape which we term a 'chair/ the sense- [101} data in- 
volved are not necessarily elements in the 'real internal constitution' of this 



The Extensive Continuum 65 

chair-image: they are elements— in some way of feeling— in the 'real in- 
ternal constitutions' of those antecedent organs of the human body with 
which we perceive the 'chair/ The direct recognition of such antecedent 
actual entities, with which we perceive contemporaries, is hindered and, 
apart from exceptional circumstances, rendered impossible by the spatial 
and temporal vagueness which infect such data. Later (cf. Part III, Chs. 
Ill to V) the whole question of this perception of a nexus vaguely, that is 
to say, without distinction of the actual entities composing it, is discussed 
in terms of the theory of prehensions, and in relation to the Category of 
Transmutation. 



SECTION II 

This account of 'presentational immediacy' presupposes two metaphysi- 
cal assumptions: 

(i) That the actual world, in so far as it is a community of entities 
which are settled, actual, and already become, conditions and limits the 
potentiality for creativeness beyond itself. This 'given' world provides de- 
terminate data in the form of those objectifications of themselves which 
the characters of its actual entities can provide. This is a limitation laid 
upon the general potentiality provided by eternal objects, considered 
merely in respect to the generality of their natures. Thus, relatively to any 
actual entity, there is a 'giver/ world of settled actual entities and a 'real' 
potentiality, which is the datum for creativeness beyond that standpoint. 
This datum, which is the primary phase in the process constituting an 
actual entity, is nothing else than the actual world itself in its character 
of a possibility for the process of being felt. This exemplifies the meta- 
physical principle that every 'being' is a potential for a 'becoming/ The 
actual world is the 'objective content' of each new creation. 

Thus we have always to consider two meanings of [102] potentiality: (a) 
the 'general' potentiality, which is the bundle of possibilities, mutually con- 
sistent or alternative, provided by the multiplicity of eternal objects, and 
(b) the 'real' potentiality, which is conditioned by the data provided by 
the actual world. General potentiality is absolute, and real potentiality is 
relative to some actual entity, taken as a standpoint whereby the actual 
world is denned. It must be remembered that the phrase 'actual world' is 
like 'yesterday' and 'tomorrow/ in that it alters its meaning according to 
standpoint. The actual world must always mean the community of all 
actual entities, including the primordial actual entity called 'God' and 
the temporal actual entities. 

Curiously enough, even at this early stage of metaphysical discussion, 
the influence of the 'relativity theory' of modern physics is important. 
According to the classical 'uniquely serial' view of time, two contemporary 
actual entities define the same actual world. According to the modern view 



66 Discussions and Applications 

no two actual entities define the same actual world. Actual entities are 
called 'contemporary' when neither belongs to the given* actual world de- 
fined by the other. 

The differences between the actual worlds of a pair of contemporary 
entities, which are in a certain sense 'neighbours/ are negligible for most 
human purposes. Thus the difference between the 'classical' and the 'rela- 
tivity' view of time only rarely has any important relevance. I shall always 
adopt the relativity view; for one reason, because it seems better to accord 
with the general philosophical doctrine of relativity which is presupposed 
in the philosophy of organism; and for another reason, because with rare 
exceptions the classical doctrine can be looked on as a special case of the 
relativity doctrine— a case which does not seem to accord with experimental 
evidence. In other words, the classical view seems to limit a general 
philosophical doctrine; it is the larger assumption; and its consequences, 
taken in conjunction with other scientific principles, seem to be false. 

[J 03] (ii) The second metaphysical assumption is that the real poten- 
tialities relative to all standpoints are coordinated as diverse determinations 
of one extensive continuum. This extensive continuum is one relational 
complex in which all potential objectifications find their niche. It underlies 
the whole world, past, present, and future. Considered in its full generality, 
apart from the additional conditions proper only to the cosmic epoch of 
electrons, protons, molecules, and star-systems, the properties of this con- 
tinuum are very few and do not include the relationships of metrical 
geometry. An extensive continuum is a complex of entities united by the 
various allied relationships of whole to part, and of overlapping so as to 
possess common parts, and of contact, and of other relationships derived 
from these primary relationships. The notion of a 'continuum' involves 
both the property of indefinite divisibility and the property of unbounded 
extension. There are always entities beyond entities, because nonentity is 
no boundary. This extensive continuum expresses the solidarity of all pos- 
sible standpoints throughout the whole process of the world. It is not a fact 
prior to the world; it is the first determination of order— that is, of real 
potentiality— arising out of the general character of the world. In its full 
generality beyond the present epoch, it does not involve shapes, dimen- 
sions, or measurability; these are additional determinations of real po- 
tentiality arising from our cosmic epoch. 

This extensive continuum is 'real/ because it expresses a fact derived 
from the actual world and concerning the contemporary actual world. All 
actual entities are related according to the determinations of this con- 
tinuum; and all possible actual entities in the future must exemplify these 
determinations in their relations with the already actual world. The reality 
of the future is bound up with the reality of this continuum. It is the 
reality of what is potential, in its character of a real component of what is 
actual. Such a real component must be interpreted in \104] terms of the 



The Extensive Continuum 67 

relatedness of prehensions. This task will be undertaken in Chapter V of 
Part IV of these lectures. 

Actual entities atomize the extensive continuum. This continuum is in 
itself merely the potentiality for division; an actual entity effects this 
division. The objectification of the contemporary world merely expresses 
that world in terms of its potentiality for subdivision and in terms of the 
mutual perspectives which any such subdivision will bring into real ef- 
fectiveness. These are the primary governing data for any actual entity; 
for they express how all actual entities are in the solidarity of one world. 
With the becoming of any actual entity what was previously potential in 
the space-time continuum is now the primary real phase in something ac- 
tual. For each process of concrescence a regional standpoint in the world, 
defining a limited potentiality for objectifications, has been adopted. In 
the mere extensive continuum there is no principle to determine what 
regional quanta shall be atomized, so as to form the real perspective stand- 
point for the primary data constituting the basic phase in the concrescence 
of an actual entity. The factors in the actual world whereby this de- 
termination is effected will be discussed at a later stage of this investiga- 
tion. They constitute the initial phase of the 'subjective aim/ This initial 
phase is a direct derivate from God's primordial nature. In this function, 
as in every other, God is the organ of novelty, aiming at intensification. 

In the mere continuum there are contrary potentialities; in the actual 
world there are definite atomic actualities determining one coherent sys- 
tem of real divisions throughout the region of actuality. Every actual entity 
in its relationship to other actual entities is in this sense somewhere in 
the continuum, and arises out of the data provided by this standpoint. 
But in another sense it is everywhere throughout the continuum; for its 
constitution includes the objectifications of the actual world and thereby 
includes the continuum; also the [105] potential objectifications of itself 
contribute to the real potentialities whose solidarity the continuum ex- 
presses. Thus the continuum is present in each actual entity, and each 
actual entity pervades the continuum. 

This conclusion can be stated otherwise. Extension, apart from its 
spatialization and temporalization, is that general scheme of relationships 
providing the capacity that many objects can be welded into the real unity 
of one experience. Thus, an act of experience has an objective scheme of 
extensive order by reason of the double fact that its own perspective stand- 
point has extensive content, and that the other actual entities are objecti- 
fied with the retention of their extensive relationships. These extensive 
relationships are more fundamental than their more special spatial and 
temporal relationships. Extension is the most general scheme of real po- 
tentiality, providing the background for all other organic relations. The 
potential scheme does not determine its own atomization by actual en- 
tities. It is divisible; but its real division by actual entities depends upon 



68 Discussions and Applications 

more particular characteristics of the actual entities constituting the ante- 
cedent environment. In respect to time, this atomization takes the special 
form 2 of the 'epochal theory of time/ In respect to space, it means that 
every actual entity in the temporal world is to be credited with a spatial 
volume for its perspective standpoint. These conclusions are required by 
the consideration 3 of Zeno's arguments, in connection with the presump- 
tion that an actual entity is an act of experience. The authority of Wil- 
liam James can be quoted in support of this conclusion. He writes: "Either 
your experience is of no content, of no change, or it is of a perceptible 
amount of content or change. Your acquaintance with reality grows liter- 
ally by buds or drops of perception. Intellectually and on reflection you 
can divide these into components, but as immediately given, [106] they 
come totally or not at all." 4 James also refers to Zeno. In substance I agree 
with his argument from Zeno; though I do not think that he allows suf- 
ficiently for those elements in Zeno's paradoxes which are the product of 
inadequate mathematical knowledge. But I agree that a valid argument 
remains after the removal of the invalid parts. 

The argument, so far as it is valid, elicits a contradiction from the two 
premises: (i) that in a becoming something (res vera) becomes, and (ii) 
that every act of becoming is divisible into earlier and later sections which 
are themselves acts of becoming. Consider, for example, an act of becom- 
ing during one second. The act is divisible into two acts, one during the 
earlier half of the second, the other during the later half of the second. 
Thus that which becomes during the whole second presupposes that 
which becomes during the first half-second. Analogously, that which be- 
comes during the first half-second presupposes that which becomes dur- 
ing the first quarter-second, and so on indefinitely. Thus if we consider 
the process of becoming up to the beginning of the second in question, 
and ask what then becomes, no answer can be given. For, whatever creature 
we indicate presupposes an earlier creature which became after the be- 
ginning of the second and antecedently to the indicated t creature. There- 
fore there is nothing which becomes, so as to effect a transition into the 
second in question. 

The difficulty is not evaded by assuming that something becomes at 
each non-extensive instant of time. For at the beginning of the second of 
time there is no next instant at which something can become. 

Zeno in his 'Arrow in Its Flight' seems to have had an obscure grasp of 
this argument. But the introduction of motion brings in irrelevant details. 
The true difficulty is to understand how the arrow survives the lapse of 



2 Cf. my Science and the Modern World, Ch. VII. 

3 Cf. loc. cit.; and Part IV of the present work. 

4 Some Problems of Philosophy, Ch X; my attention was drawn to this pas- 
sage by its quotation in Religion in thef Philosophy of William James, by Pro- 
fessor J. S. Bixler. 



The Extensive Continuum 69 

time. [107] Unfortunately Descartes' treatment of 'endurance' is very 
superficial, and subsequent philosophers have followed his example. 

In his 'Achilles and the Tortoise' Zeno produces an invalid argument 
depending on ignorance of the theory of infinite convergent numerical 
series. Eliminating the irrelevant details of the race and of motion— de- 
tails which have endeared the paradox to the literature of all ages— con- 
sider the first half-second as one act of becoming, the next quarter-second 
as another such act, the next eighth-second as yet another, and so on in- 
definitely. Zeno then illegitimately assumes this infinite series of acts of 
becoming can never be exhausted. But there is no need to assume that an 
infinite series of acts of becoming, with a first act, and each act with an 
immediate successor,! is inexhaustible in the process of becoming. Simple 
arithmetic assures us that the series just indicated will be exhausted in the 
period of one second. The way is then open for the intervention of a new 
act of becoming which lies beyond the whole series. Thus this paradox of 
Zeno is based upon a mathematical fallacy. 

The modification of the *' Arrow' paradox, stated above, brings out the 
principle that every act of becoming must have an immediate successor, if 
we admit that something becomes. For otherwise we cannot point out 
what creature becomes as we enter upon the second in question. But we 
cannot, in the absence of some additional premise, infer that every act of 
becoming must have had an immediate predecessor. 

The conclusion is that in every act of becoming there is the becoming of 
something with temporal extension; but that the act itself is not extensive, 
in the sense that it is divisible into earlier and later acts of becoming which 
correspond to the extensive divisibility of what has become. 

In this section, the doctrine is enunciated that the creature is extensive, 
but that its act of becoming is not extensive. This topic is resumed in Part 
IV. How- [108] ever, some anticipation of Parts III and IV is now required. 

The res vera, in its character of concrete satisfaction, is divisible into 
prehensions which concern its first temporal half and into prehensions 
which concern its second temporal half. This divisibility is what constitutes 
its extensiveness. But this concern with a temporal and spatial sub-region 
means that the datum of the prehension in question is the actual world, 
objectified with the perspective due to that sub-region. A prehension, how- 
ever, acquires subjective form, and this subjective form is only rendered 
fully determinate by integration with conceptual prehensions belonging to 
the mental pole of the res vera. The concrescence is dominated by a sub- 
jective aim which essentially concerns the creature as a final superject. This 
subjective aim is this subject itself determining its own self-creation as one 
creature. Thus the subjective aim does not share in this divisibility. If we 
confine attention to prehensions concerned with the earlier half, their sub- 
jective forms have arisen from nothing. For the subjective aim which be- 
longs to the whole is now excluded. Thus the evolution of subjective form 
could not be referred to any actuality. The ontological principle has been 



70 Discussions and Applications 

violated. Something has floated into the world from nowhere. 

The summary statement of this discussion is, that the mental pole de- 
termines the subjective forms and that this pole is inseparable from the 
total res vera. 

SECTION III 

The discussion of the previous sections has merely given a modern 
o&gt;hape to the oldest of European philosophic doctrines. But as a doctrine 
of common sense, it is older still— as old as consciousness itself. The most 
general notions underlying the words 'space' and 'time' are those which 
this discussion has aimed at expressing in their true connection with the 
actual world. The alternative doctrine, which is the Newtonian cosmology, 
emphasized the [109] 'receptacle' theory of space-time, and minimized the 
factor of potentiality. Thus bits of space and time were conceived as being 
as actual as anything else, and as being 'occupied' by other actualities 
which were the bits of matter. This is the Newtonian absolute' theory of 
space-time, which philosophers have never accepted, though at times some 
have acquiesced. Newton's famous Scholium 5 to his first eight definitions 
in his Principia expresses this point of view with entire clearness: 

Hitherto I have laid down the definitions of such words as are less 
known, and explained the sense in which I would have them to be 
understood in the following discourse. I do not define time, space, 
place, and motion, as being well known to all. Only I must observe, 
that the vulgar conceive those quantities under no other notions but 
from the relation they bear to sensible objects. And thence arise cer- 
tain prejudices, for the removing of which, it will be convenient to dis- 
tinguish them into absolute and relative, true and apparent, mathe- 
matical and common. 

I. Absolute, true, and mathematical time, of itself, and from its 
own nature, flows equably without regard to anything external, and 
by another name is called duration: relative, apparent, and common 
time, is some sensible and external (whether accurate or unequable) 
measure of duration by thet means of motion, which is commonly 
used instead of true time; such as an hour, a day, a month, a year. 

II. Absolute space, in its own nature, and without regard to any- 
thing external, remains always similar and immovable. Relative space 
is some movable dimension or measure of the absolute spaces; which 
our senses determine by its position to bodies, and which is vulgarly 
taken for immovable space; . . . Absolute and relative space are the 
same in figure and magnitude; but they do not remain always nu- 
merically the same. . . . 

IV. ... As the order of the parts of time is [110] immutable, so 
also is the order of the parts of space. Suppose those parts to be 

5 Andrew Motte's translation; new edition revised, London, 1803. 



The Extensive Continuum 71 

moved out of their places, and they will be moved (if the expression 
may be allowed) out of themselves. For times and spaces are, as it 
were, the places as well of themselves as of all other things. All things 
are placed in time as to order of succession; and in space as to order oft 
situation. It is from their essence or nature that they are places; and 
that the primary places of things should be movable, is absurd. These 
are, therefore, the absolute places; and translations out of those places 
are the only absolute motions. . . . Now no other places are im- 
movable but those that, from infinity to infinity, do all retain the 
same given positions one to another; and upon this account must 
ever remain unmoved; and do thereby constitute, what I call, im- 
movable space. The causes by which true and relative motions are 
distinguished, one from the other, are the forces impressed upon 
bodies to generate motion. True motion is neither generated nor 
altered, but by some force impressed upon the body moved: but 
relative motion may be generated or altered without any force im- 
pressed upon the body. For it is sufficient only to impress some force 
on other bodies with which the former is compared, that by their 
giving way, that relation may be changed, in which the relative rest 
or motion of this other body did consist. . . . The effects which dis- 
tinguish absolute from relative motion are, the forces of receding 
from the axis of circular motion. For there are no such forces in a cir- 
cular motion purely relative, but, in a true and absolute circular mo- 
tion, they are greater or less, according to the quantity of motion. . . . 
Wherefore relative quantities are not the quantities themselves, 
whose names they bear, but those sensible measures of them (either 
accurate or inaccurate) which are commonly used instead of the mea- 
sured quantities themselves. . . . 

I have quoted at such length from Newton's Scholium because this 
document constitutes the clearest, most definite, and most influential 
statement among the cos- [111] mological speculations of mankind, specu- 
lations of a type which first assume scientific importance with the Py- 
thagorean school preceding and inspiring Plato. Newton is presupposing 
four types of entities which he does not discriminate in respect to their 
actuality: for him minds are actual things, bodies are actual things, ab- 
solute durations of time are actual things, and absolute places are actual 
things. He does not use the word 'actual'; but he is speaking of matter 
of fact, and he puts them all on the same level in that respect. The result 
is to land him in a clearly expressed but complex and arbitrary scheme of 
relationships between spaces inter se; between durations inter se; and be- 
tween minds, bodies, times and places, for the conjunction of them all into 
the solidarity of the one universe. For the purposes of science it was an 
extraordinarily clarifying statement, that is to say, for all the purposes of 
science within the next two hundred years, and for most of its purposes 
since that period. But, as a fundamental statement, it lies completely open 



72 Discussions and Applications 

to sceptical attack; and also, as Newton himself admits, diverges from 
common sense— "the vulgar conceive those quantities under no other 
notions but from the relation they bear to sensible objects/' Kant only 
saved it by reducing it to the description of a construct by means of which 
'pure intuition' introduces an order for chaotic data; and for the schools of 
transcendentalists derived from Kant this construct has remained in the 
inferior position of a derivative from the proper ultimate substantial 
reality. For them it is an element in 'appearance'; and appearance is to be 
distinguished from reality. The philosophy of organism is an attempt, 
with the minimum of critical adjustment, to return to the conceptions of 
'the vulgar/ f In the first place, the discussion must fasten on the notion of 
a 'sensible object/ to quote Newton's phrase. We may expand Newton's 
phrase, and state that the common sense of mankind conceives that all its 
notions ultimately refer to actual entities, or as Newton terms them, 
'sensible objects.' Newton, basing himself upon [112] current physical 
notions, conceived 'sensible objects' to be the material bodies to which 
the science of dynamics applies. He was then left with the antithesis be- 
tween 'sensible objects' and empty space. Newton, indeed, as a private 
opinion, conjectured that there is a material medium pervading space. 
But he also held that there might not be such a medium. For him the 
notion 'empty space'— that is, mere spatiality — had sense, conceived as 
an independent actual existence 'from infinity to infinity/ In this he 
differed from Descartes. Modern physics sides with Descartes. It has in- 
troduced the notion of the 'physical field.' Also the latest speculations tend 
to remove the sharp distinction between the 'occupied' portions of the 
field and the 'unoccupied' portion. Further, in these lectures (cf. Ch. Ill of 
Part II), a distinction is introduced, not explicitly in the mind either of 
'the vulgar' or of Newton. This distinction is that between (i) an actual 
entity, (ii) an enduring object, (hi) a corpuscular society, (iv) a non- 
corpuscular society, (v) a non-social nexus. A non-social nexus is what 
answers to the notion of 'chaos.' The extensive continuum is that general 
relational element in experience whereby the actual entities experienced, 
and that unit experience itself, are united in the solidarity of one common 
world. The actual entities atomize it, and thereby make real what was 
antecedently merely potential. The atomization of the extensive con- 
tinuum is also its temporalization; that is to say, it is the process of the 
becoming of actuality into what in itself is merely potential. The sys- 
tematic scheme, in its completeness embracing the actual past and the 
potential future, is prehended in the positive experience of each actual 
entity. In this sense, it is Kant's 'form of intuition'; but it is derived from 
the actual world qua datum, and thus is not 'pure' in Kant's sense of that 
term. It is not productive of the ordered world, but derivative from it. 
The prehension of this scheme is one more example that actual fact in- 
cludes in its own constitution [113] real potentiality which is referent 
beyond itself. The former example is 'appetition.' 



The Extensive Continuum 73 

SECTION IV 

Newton in his description of space and time has confused what is 'real' 
potentiality with what is actual fact. He has thereby been led to diverge 
from the judgment of 'the vulgar' who "conceive those quantities under no 
other notions but from the relation they bear to sensible objects."! The 
philosophy of organism starts by agreeing with 'the vulgar' except that the 
term 'sensible object' is replaced by 'actual entity'; so as to free our notions 
from participation in an epistemologicalf theory as to sense-perception. 
When we further consider how to adjust Newton's other descriptions to 
the organic theory, the surprising fact emerges that we must identify the 
atomized quantum of extension correlative to an actual entity, with New- 
ton's absolute place and absolute duration. Newton's proof that motion 
does not apply to absolute place, which in its nature is immovable, also 
holds. Thus an actual entity never moves: it is where it is and what it is. 
In order to emphasize this characteristic by a phrase connecting the notion 
of 'actual entity' more closely with our ordinary habits of thought, I will 
also use the term 'actual occasion' in the place of the term 'actual entity.' 
Thus the actual world is built up of actual occasions; and by the oncologi- 
cal principle whatever things there are in any sense of 'existence,' are de- 
rived by abstraction from actual occasions. I shall use the term 'event' in 
the more general sense of a nexus of actual occasions, inter-related in some 
determinate fashion in one extensive quantum. An actual occasion is the 
limiting type of an event with only one member. 

It is quite obvious that meanings have to be found for the notions of 
'motion' and of 'moving bodies.' For the present, this enquiry must be 
postponed to a later chapter [114] (cf. Part IV and also Ch. Ill of this 
Part). It is sufficient to say that a molecule in the sense of a moving body, 
with a history of local change, is not an actual occasion; it must therefore 
be some kind of nexus of actual occasions. In this sense it is an event, but 
not an actual occasion. The fundamental meaning of the notion of 
'change' is 'the difference between actual occasions comprised in some 
determinate event.' 

A further elucidation of the status of the extensive continuum in the 
organic philosophy is obtained by comparison with Descartes' doctrine of 
material bodies. It is at once evident that the organic theory is much 
closer to Descartes' views than to Newton's, On this topic Spinoza is prac- 
tically a logical systematization of Descartes, purging him of inconsis- 
tencies. But this attainment of logical coherence is obtained by empha- 
sizing just those elements in Descartes which the philosophy of organism 
rejects. In this respect, Spinoza perforins the same office for Descartes that 
Hume does for Locke. The philosophy of organism may be conceived as a 
recurrence to Descartes and to Locke, in respect to just those elements in 
their philosophies which are usually rejected by reason of their inconsis- 
tency with the elements which their successors developed. Thus the phi- 



74 Discussions and Applications 

losophy of organism is pluralistic in contrast with Spinoza's monism; and 
is a doctrine of experience prehending actualities, in contrast with Hume's 
sensationalist phenomenalism. 

First let us recur to Descartes at the stage of thought antecedent to his 
disastrous classification of substances into two species, bodily substance and 
mental substance. At the beginning of Meditation i, he writes: 
For example, there is the fact that I am here, seated by the fire, 
attired in a dressing gown, having this paper in my hands and other 
similar matters. And how could I deny that these hands and this body 
are mine, were it not perhaps that I compare myself to certain per- 
sons, devoid of sense. . . . But they are mad, and I should not [JJ5] 
be any thef less insane were I to follow examples so extravagant. 
At the same time I must remember that I am a man, and that con- 
sequently I am in the habit of sleeping, and in my dreams represent- 
ing to myself the same things or sometimes even less probable things, 
than do those who are insane in their waking moments. ... At the 
same time we must at least confess that the things which are repre- 
sented to us in sleep are like painted representations which can only 
have been formed as the counterparts of something real and true [ad 
similiiudinem rerum verarum], and that in this way those general 
things at least, i.e. eyes, a head, hands, and a whole body, are not 
imaginary things, but things really existent. . . . And for the same 
reason, although these general things, to wit, [a body], 6 eyes, a head, 
hands, and such like, may be imaginary, we are bound at the same 
time to confess that there are at least some other objects yet more 
simple and more universal, which are real and true [vera esse]; and of 
these just in the same way as with certain real colours, all these images 
of things which dwell in our thoughts, whether true and real or false 
and fantastic, are formed. 

To such a class of things pertains corporeal nature in general, and 
its extension, the figure of extended things, their quantity or magni- 
tude and number, as also the place in which they are, the time which 
measures their duration, and so on. . . . 

In Meditation II, after a slight recapitulation, he continues, speaking of 
God: 
Then without doubt I exist also if he deceives me, and let him 
deceive me as much as he will, he can never cause me to be nothing 
so long as I think that I am something. So that after having reflected 
well and carefully examined all things, we must come to the definite 
conclusion that this proposition: I am, I exist, is necessarily true each 
time that I pronounce it, or that I mentally conceive it. 
[116} At the end of the quotation from Meditation J, Descartes uses the 

6 Haldane and Ross enclose in square brackets phrases appearing in the French 
version, and not in the Latin. I have compared with the Latin. 



The Extensive Continuum 75 

phrase res vera in the same sense as that in which I have used the term 
'actual/ It means 'existence' in the fullest sense of that term, beyond 
which there is no other. Descartes, indeed, would ascribe to God 'exis- 
tence' in a generically different sense. In the philosophy of organism, as 
here developed, God's existence is not generically different from that of 
other actual entities, except that he is 'primordial' in a sense to be grad- 
ually explained. 

Descartes does not explicitly frame the definition of actuality in terms 
of the ontological principle, as given in Section IVt of this chapter, that 
actual occasions form the ground from which all other types of existence 
are derivative and abstracted; but he practically formulates an equivalent in 
subject-predicate phraseology, when he writes: "For this reason, when we 
perceive any attribute, we therefore conclude that some existing thing or 
substance to which it may be attributed, is necessarily present." 7 For 
Descartes the word 'substance' is the equivalent of my phrase 'actual occa- 
sion.' I refrain from the term 'substance,' for one reason because it sug- 
gests the subject-predicate notion; and for another reason because Des- 
cartes and Locke permit their substances to undergo adventures of chang- 
ing qualifications, and thereby create difficulties. 

In the quotation from the second Meditation: "I am, I exist, is nec- 
essarily true each time that I pronounce it, or that I mentally conceive it,"f 
Descartes adopts the position that an act of experience is the primary type 
of actual occasion. But in his subsequent developments he assumes that 
his mental substances endure change. Here he goes beyond his argument. 
For each time he pronounces 'I am, I exist/ the actual occasion, which is 
the ego, is different; and the 'he' which is common to the two egos is an 
eternal object or, alternatively, the nexus of successive occasions. Also in 
the quotation from the first [117] Meditation he begins by appealing to an 
act of experience— "I am here, seated by the fire. ..." He then associates 
this act of experience with his body— "these hands and body are mine.*' 
He then finally appeals for some final notion of actual entities in the 
remarkable sentence: "And for the same reason, although these general 
things, to wit, [a body], eyes, a head, hands, and such like, may be imaginary, 
we are bound at the same time to confess that there are at least some 
other objects yet more simple and more universal, which are real and true; 
and of these ... all these images of things which dwell in our thoughts, 
whether true and real or false and fantastic, are formed." 

Notice the peculiarly intimate association with immediate experience 
which Descartes claims for his body, an association beyond the mere 
sense-perception of the contemporary world— "these hands and feet are 
mine." In the philosophy of organism this immediate association is the 
recognition of them as distinguishable data whose formal constitutions are 
immediately felt in the origination of experience. In this function the 

7 Principles of Philosophy, Part I, 52. 



76 Discussions and Applications 

animal body does not differ in principle from the rest of the past actual 
world; but it does differ in an intimacy of association by reason of which 
its spatial and temporal connections obtain some definition in the ex- 
perience of the subject. What is vague for the rest of the world has ob- 
tained some additional measure of distinctness for the bodily organs. But, 
in principle, it would be equally true to say, The actual world is mine.' 
Descartes also asserts that "objects yet more simple and more uni- 
versal, which are real and true" are what the "images of things which 
dwellf in our thoughts"! are formed of. This does not seem to accord 
with his theory of perception, of a later date, stated in his Principles, Part 
IV, 196, 197, 198. In the later theory the emphasis is on the judicium, in 
the sense of Inference/ and not in the sense of inspectio of realitas ob- 
jectiva. But it does accord with the organic theory, that the objectifications 
of other actual occasions form the given data from which an actual occa- 
[118] sion originates. He has also brought the body into its immediate 
association with the act of experience. Descartes, with Newton, assumes 
that the extensive continuum is actual in the full sense of being an actual 
entity. But he refrains from the additional material bodies which Newton 
provides. Also in his efforts to guard his representative 'ideas' from the 
fatal gap between mental symbol and actuality symbolized, he practically, 
in some sentences, expresses the doctrine of objectification here put for- 
ward. Thus: 
Hence the idea of the sun will be the sun itself existing in the 
mind, not indeed formally, as it exists in the sky, but objectively, 
i.e. in the way in which objects are wont to exist in the mind; and this 
mode of being is truly much less perfect than that in which things 
exist outside the mind, but it is not on that account mere nothing, 
as I have already said. 8 

Both Descartes and Locke, in order to close the gap between idea repre- 
senting and actual entity represented/ require this doctrine of 'the sun 
itself existing in the mind/ But though, as in this passage, they at times 
casually state it in order to push aside the epistemological difficulty, they 
neither of them live up to these admissions. They relapse into the tacit 
presupposition of the mind with its private ideas which are in fact qualities 
without intelligible connection with the entities represented. 

But if we take the doctrine of objectification seriously, the extensive 
continuum at once becomes the primary factor in objectification. It pro- 
vides the general scheme of extensive perspective which is exhibited in all 
the mutual objectifications by which actual entities prehend each other. 
Thus in itself, the extensive continuum is a scheme of real potentiality 
which must find exemplification t in the mutual prehension of all actual 
entities. It also finds exemplification in each actual entity considered 

8 Reply to Objections J: I have already quoted this passage in my Science and 
the* Modem Wodd f note to Ch. IV. 



The Extensive Continuum 77 

'formally/ In this sense, actual entities are extensive, [JJ9] since they arise 
out of a potentiality for division, which in actual fact is not divided (cf. 
Part IV). It is for this reason, as stated above, that the phrase 'actual 
occasion' is used in the place of 'actual entity/ 

Descartes' doctrine of the physical world as exhibiting an extensive 
plenum of actual entities is practically the same as the 'organic' doctrine. 
But Descartes' bodies have to move, and this presupposition introduces 
new obscurities. It is exactly at this point that Newton provides a clear 
conception in comparison with that of Descartes. In the 'organic' doctrine, 
motion is not attributable to an actual occasion. 

In the 'organic' theory, (i) there is only one type of temporal actual 
entity; (ii) each such actual entity is extensive; (iii) from the standpoint 
of any one actual entity, the 'given/ actual world is a nexus of actual en- 
tities, transforming the potentiality of the extensive scheme into a plenum 
of actual occasions; (iv) in this plenum, motion cannot be significantly 
attributed to any actual occasion; (v) the plenum is continuous in respect 
to the potentiality from which it arises, but each actual entity is atomic; 
(vi) the term 'actual occasion' is used synonymously t with 'actual entity'; 
but chiefly when its character of extensiveness has some direct relevance to 
the discussion, either extensiveness in the form of temporal extensiveness, 
that is to say 'duration/ or extensiveness in the form of spatial extension, 
or in the more complete signification of spatio-temporal extensiveness. 

SECTION V 

The baseless metaphysical doctrine of 'undifferentiated endurance' is a 
subordinate derivative from the misapprehension of the proper character 
of the extensive scheme. 

In our perception of the contemporary world via presentational im- 
mediacy, nexus of actual entities are objectified for the percipient under 
the perspective of their characters of extensive continuity. In the percep- 
tion of a contemporary stone, for example, the separate indi- \120) viduality 
of each actual entity in the nexus constituting the stone is merged into the 
unity of the extensive plenum, which for Descartes and for common sense, 
is the stone. The complete objectification is effected by the generic exten- 
sive perspective of the stone, specialized into the specific perspective of 
some sense-datum, such as some definite colour, for example. Thus the 
immediate percept assumes the character of the quiet undifferentiated en- 
durance of the material stone, perceived by means of its quality of colour. 
This basic notion dominates language, and haunts both science and philos- 
ophy. Further, by an unfortunate application of the excellent maxim, that 
our conjectural explanation should always proceed by the utilization of a 
vera causa, whenever science or philosophy has ventured to extrapolate 
beyond the limits of the immediate deliverance of direct perception, a 
satisfactory explanation has always complied with the condition that sub- 
stances with undifferentiated endurance of essential attributes be pro- 



78 Discussions and Applications 

duced, and that activity be explained as the occasional modification of 
their accidental qualities and relations. Thus the imaginations of men are 
dominated by the quiet extensive stone with its relationships of positions, 
and its quality of colour—relationships and qualities which occasionally 
change. The stone, thus interpreted, guarantees the vera causa, and con- 
jectural explanations in science and philosophy follow its model. 

Thus in framing cosmological theory, the notion of continuous stuff with 
permanent attributes, enduring without differentiation, and retaining its 
self-identity through any stretch of time however small or large, has been 
fundamental. The stuff undergoes change in respect to accidental qualities 
and relations; but it is numerically self-identical in its character of one 
actual entity throughout its accidental adventures. The admission of this 
fundamental metaphysical concept has wrecked the various systems of 
pluralistic realism. 

This metaphysical concept has formed the basis of scientific materialism. 
For example, when the activities [121] associated with so-called empty 
space required scientific formulation, the scientists of the nineteenth cen- 
tury produced the materialistic ether as the ultimate substratum whose 
accidental adventures constituted these activities. 

But the interpretation of the stone, on which the whole concept is 
based, has proved to be entirely mistaken. In the first place, from the 
seventeenth century onwards the notion of the simple inherence of the 
colour in the stone has had to be given up. This introduces the further 
difficulty that it is the colour which is extended and only inferentially the 
stone, since now we have had to separate the colour from the stone. 
Secondly, the molecular theory has robbed the stone of its continuity, of 
its unity, and of its passiveness. The stone is now conceived as a society of 
separate molecules in violent agitation. But the metaphysical concepts, 
which had their origin in a mistake about the stone, were now applied to 
the individual molecules. Each atom was still a stuff which retained its self- 
identity and its essential attributes in any portion of time— however short, 
and however long— provided that it did not perish. The notion of the un- 
differentiated endurance of substances with essential attributes and with 
accidental adventures! was still applied. This is the root doctrine of ma- 
terialism: the substance, thus conceived, is the ultimate actual entity. 

But this materialistic concept has proved to be as mistaken for the atom 
as it was for the stone. 'The atom is only explicable as a society with ac- 
tivities involving rhythms with their definite periods. Again the concept 
shifted its application: protons and electrons were conceived as ma- 
terialistic electric charges whose activities could be construed as locomotive 
adventures. We are now approaching the limits of any reasonable certainty 
in our scientific knowledge; but again there is evidence that the concept 
may be mistaken. The mysterious quanta of energy have made their ap- 
pearance, derived, as it would seem, from the recesses of protons, or of 
electrons. Still worse for the concept, these quanta seem to dissolve [122] 



The Extensive Continuum 79 

into the vibrations of light. Also the material of the stars seems to be 
wasting itself in the production of the vibrations. 

Further, the quanta of energy are associated by a simple law with the 
periodic rhythms which we detect in the molecules. Thus the quanta are, 
themselves, in their own nature, somehow vibratory; but they emanate 
from the protons and electrons. Thus there is every reason to believe that 
rhythmic periods cannot be dissociated from the protonic and electronic 
entities. 

The same concept has been applied in other connections where it even 
more obviously fails. It is said that 'men are rational/ This is palpably 
false: they are only intermittently rational—merely liable to rationality. 
Again the phrase 'Socrates is mortal' is only another way of saying that 
'perhaps he will die/ The intellect of Socrates is intermittent: he occa- 
sionally sleeps and he can be drugged or stunned. 

The simple notion of an enduring substance sustaining persistent quali- 
ties, either essentially or accidentally, expresses a useful abstract for many 
purposes of life. But whenever we try to use it as a fundamental statement 
of the nature of things, it proves itself mistaken. It arose from a mistake 
and has never succeeded in any of its applications. But it has had one 
success: it has entrenched itself in language, in Aristotelian logic, and in 
metaphysics. For its employment in language and in logic, there is— as 
stated above— a sound pragmatic defence. But in metaphysics the concept 
is sheer error. This error does not consist in the employment of the word 
'substance'; but in the employment of the notion of an actual entity which 
is characterized by essential qualities, and remains numerically one amidst 
the changes of accidental relations and of accidental qualities. The con- 
trary doctrine is that an actual entity never changes, and that it is the out- 
come of whatever can be ascribed to it in the way of qualitv or relationship. 
There then remain two alternatives for philosophy: (i) a monistic universe 
[123] with the illusion of change; and (ii) a pluralistic universe in which 
'change' means the diversities among the actual entities which belong to 
some one society of a definite type. 

SECTION VI 

We can now, in a preliminary way, summarize some of the agreements 
and disagreements between the philosophy of organism and the seven- 
teenth-century founders of the modern philosophic and scientific traditions. 

It is the basis of any realistic philosophy, that in perception there is a 
disclosure of objectified data, which are known as having a community 
with the immediate experience for which they are data. This 'community'* 
is a community of common activity involving mutual implication. This 
premise is asserted as a primary fact, implicitly assumed in every detail of 
our organization of life. It is implicitly asserted by Locke in his statement 
(II, XXIII, 7, heading), "Power, a great part of our complex ideas of 



80 Discussions and Applications 

substances ."t The philosophy of organism extends the Cartesian subjectiv- 
ism by affirming the 'ontological principle' and by construing it as the defi- 
nition of 'actuality/ This amounts to the assumption that each actual entity 
is a locus for the universe. Accordingly Descartes' other statement, that 
every attribute requires a substance,! is merely a special, limited example 
of this more general principle. 

Newton, in his treatment of space, transforms potentiality into actual fact, 
that is to say, into a creature, instead of a datum for creatures. According 
to the philosophy of organism, the extensive space-time continuum is the 
fundamental aspect of the limitation laid upon abstract potentiality by the 
actual world. A more complete rendering of this limited, 'real' potentiality 
is the 'physical field/ A new creation has to arise from the actual world as 
much as from pure potentiality: it arises from the total universe and not 
solely from its mere abstract elements. It also adds to that universe. Thus 
[124] every actual entity springs from that universe which there is for it. 
Causation is nothing else than one outcome of the principle that every 
actual entity has to house its actual world. 

According to Newton, a portion of space cannot move. We have to ask 
how this truth, obvious from Newton's point of view, takes shape in the 
organic theory. Instead of a region of space, we should consider a bit of the 
physical field. This bit, expressing one way in which the actual world in- 
volves the potentiality for a new creation, acquires the unity of an actual 
entity. The physical field is, in this way, atomized with definite divisions: it 
becomes a 'nexus' f of actualities. Such a quantum (i.e., each actual divi- 
sion) of the extensive continuum is the primary phase of a creature. This 
quantum is constituted by its totality of relationships and cannot move. 
Also the creature cannot have any external adventures, but only the in- 
ternal adventure of becoming. Its birth is its end. 

This is a theory of monads; but it differs from Leibniz's in that his 
monads change. In the organic theory, they merely become. Each monadic 
creature is a mode of the process of 'feeling' the world, of housing the 
world in one unit of complex feeling, in every way determinate. Such a 
unit is an 'actual occasion'; it is the ultimate creature derivative from the 
creative process. 

The term 'event' is used in a more genera] sense. An event is a nexus of 
actual occasions inter-related in some determinate fashion in some exten- 
sive quantum: it is either a nexus in its formal completeness, or it is an 
objectified nexus. One actual occasion is a limiting type of event. The 
most general sense of the meaning of change is 'the differences between 
actual occasions in one event.' For example, a molecule is a historic route 
of actual occasions; and such a route is an 'event.' Now the motion of the 
molecule is nothing else than the differences between the successive occa- 
sions of its life-history in respect to the extensive quanta from which they 
arise; \12S] and the changes in the molecule are the consequential dif- 
ferences in the actual occasions. 



The Extensive Continuum 81 

The organic doctrine is closer to Descartes than to Newton. Also it is 
close to Spinoza; but Spinoza bases his philosophy upon the monistic sub- 
stance, of which the actual occasions are inferior modes. The philosophy 
of organism inverts this point of view. 

As to the direct knowledge of the actual world as a datum for the 
immediacy of feeling, we first refer to Descartes in Meditation J, 'These 
hands and this body are mine' 7 ; also to Hume in his many assertions of the 
type, we see with our eyes. Such statements witness to direct knowledge of 
the antecedent functioning of the body in sense-perception. Both agree- 
though Hume more explicitly— that sense-perception of the contemporary 
world is accompanied by perception of the 'withness' of the body. It is 
this withness that makes the body the starting point for our knowledge of 
the circumambient world. We find here our direct knowledge of 'causal 
efficacy/ Hume and Descartes in their theory of direct perceptive knowl- 
edge dropped out this withness of the body; and thus confined perception 
to presentational immediacy. Santayana, in his doctrine of 'animal faith/ 
practically agrees with Hume and Descartes as to this withness of the 
actual world, including the body. Santayana also excludes our knowledge 
of it from givenness. Descartes calls it a certain kind of 'understanding'; 
Santayana calls it 'animal faith' provoked by 'shock'; and Hume calls it 
"practice. 7 

But we must— to avoid 'solipsism of the present moment' — include in 
direct perception something more than presentational immediacy. For the 
organic theory, the most primitive perception is 'feeling the body as func- 
tioning/ This is a feeling of the world in the past; it is the inheritance of 
the world as a complex of feeling; namely, it is the feeling of derived feel- 
ings. The later, sophisticated perception is 'feeling the contemporary 
world/ Even this presentational immediacy begins with [126] sense-presen- 
tation of the contemporary body. The body, however, is only a peculiarly 
intimate bit of the world. Just as Descartes said, 'this body is mine'; so he 
should have said, 'this actual world is mine/ My process of 'being myself 
is my origination from my possession of the world. 

It is obvious that there arise the questions of comparative relevance and 
of comparative vagueness, which constitute the perspective of the world. 
For example, the body is that portion of the world where, in causal per- 
ception, there is some distinct separation of regions. There is not, in causal 
perception, this distinctness for the past world external to the body. We 
eke out our knowledge by 'symbolic transference 7 from causal perception 
to sense-presentation, and vice versa. 

Those realists, who base themselves upon the notion of substance, do 
not get away from the notion of actual entities which move and change. 
From the point of view of the philosophy of organism, there is great 
merit in Newton's immovable receptacles. But for Newton they are eternal. 
Locke's notion of time hits the mark better: time is 'perpetually perish- 
ing.' In the organic philosophy an actual entity has 'perished* when it is 



82 Discussions and Applications 

complete. The pragmatic use of the actual entity, constituting its static 
life, lies in the future. The creature perishes and is immortal. The actual 
entities beyond it can say, 'It is mine/ But the possession imposes 
conformation. 

This conception of an actual entity in the fluent world is little more 
than an expansion of a sentence in the Timaeus: 9 "But that which is 
conceived by opinion with the help of sensation and without reason, is 
always in af process of becoming and perishing and never really is." Berg- 
son, in his protest against "spatialization," is only echoing Plato's phrase 
'and never really is/ 



9 28A;f Jowett's translation. Professor A. E. Taylor in his Commentary On 
Plato's Timaeus renders the word 8o£ a by 'belief or 'judgment' in the place of 
Jowett's word 'opinion/ Taylor's translation brings out the Platonic influence in 
Descartes' Meditations, namely Plato's 8o£ a is the Cartesian judicium. 



CHAPTER III 
THE ORDER OF NATURE 

SECTION I 

[127] In this, and in the next chapter, among modern philosophers we 
are chiefly concerned with Hume and with Kant, and among ancient phi- 
losophers with the Timaeus of Plato. These chapters are concerned with 
the allied problems of 'order in the universe/ of 'induction/ and of 'gen- 
eral truths/ The present chapter is wholly concerned with the topic of 
'order/ For the organic doctrine the problem of order assumes primary 
importance. No actual entity can rise beyond what the actual world as a 
datum from its standpoint— its actual world— allows it to be. Each such 
entity arises from a primary phase of the concrescence of objectifications 
which are in some respects settled: the basis of its experience is 'given/ 
Now the correlative of 'order' is 'disorder/ There can be no peculiar mean- 
ing in the notion of 'order' unless this contrast holds. Apart from it, 'order* 
must be a synonym for 'givenness/ But 'order' means more than 'given- 
ness/ though it presupposes 'givenness';t 'disorder' is also 'given/ Each 
actual entity requires a totality of 'givenness/ and each totality of 'given- 
ness' attains its measure of 'order/ 

Four grounds of 'order' at once emerge: 

(i) That 'order' in the actual world is differentiated from mere 
'givenness' by introduction of adaptation for the attainment of an end. 

(ii) That this end is concerned with the gradations of intensity in the 
satisfactions of actual entities (members of the nexus) in whose formal 
constitutions the nexus [128] (i.e., antecedent members of the nexus) in 
question is objectified. 

(iii) That the heightening of intensity arises from order such that the 
multiplicity of components in the nexus can enter explicit feeling as con- 
trasts, and are not dismissed into negative prehensions as incompatibilities. 

(iv) That 'intensity' in the formal constitution of a subject-superject 
involves 'appetition' in its objective functioning as superject. 

'Order' is a mere generic term: there can only be some definite specific 
'order/ not merely 'order' in the vague. Thus every definite total phase of 
'givenness' involves a reference to that specific 'order' which is its dominant 
ideal, and involves the specific 'disorder' due to its inclusion of 'given' 
components which exclude the attainment of the full ideal. The attain- 
ment is partial, and thus there is 'disorder'; but there is some attainment, 

83 



84 Discussions and Applications 

and thus there is some 'order/ There is not just one ideal 'order' which 
all actual entities should attain and fail to attain . In each case there is an 
ideal peculiar to each particular actual entity, and arising from the domi- 
nant components in its phase of 'givenness.' This notion of 'dominance* 
will have to be discussed later in connection with the notion of the sys- 
tematic character of a 'cosmic epoch' and of the subordinate systematic 
characters of 'societies' included in a cosmic epoch. The notion of one 
ideal arises from the disastrous overmoralization of thought under the in- 
fluence of fanaticism, or pedantry. The notion of a dominant ideal peculiar 
to each actual entity is Platonic. 

It is notable that no biological science has been able to express itself 
apart from phraseology which is meaningless unless it refers to ideals proper 
to the organism in question. This aspect of the universe impressed itself 
on that great biologist and philosopher, Aristotle. His philosophy led to a 
wild overstressing of the notion of 'final causes'! during the Christian mid- 
dle ages; and thence, by a reaction, to the correlative overstressing of [129] 
the notion of 'efficient causes' during the modern scientific period. One 
task of a sound metaphysics is to exhibit final and efficient causes in their 
proper relation to each other. The necessity and the difficulty of this task 
are stressed by Hume in his Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion. 

Thus the notion of 'order' is bound up with the notion of an actual 
entity as involving an attainment which is a specific satisfaction. This satis- 
faction is the attainment of something individual to the entity in question. 
It cannot be construed as a component contributing to its own concres- 
cence; it is the ultimate fact, individual to the entity. The notion of 'satis- 
faction' is the notion of the 'entity as concrete' abstracted from the 'process 
of concrescence'; it is the outcome separated from the process, thereby 
losing the actuality of the atomic entity, which is both process and out- 
come. 'Satisfaction' provides the individual element in the composition of 
the actual entity— that element which has led to the definition of substance 
as 'requiring nothing but itself in order to exist.' But the 'satisfaction' is 
the 'superject' rather than the 'substance' or the 'subject.' It closes up the 
entity; and yet is the superject adding its character to the creativity whereby 
there is a becoming of entities superseding the one in question. The 
'formal' reality of the actuality in question belongs to its process of con- 
crescence and not to its 'satisfaction/ This is the sense in which the 
philosophy of organism interprets Plato's phrase 'and never really is'; for 
the superject can only be interpreted in terms of its 'objective immortality/ 

'Satisfaction' is a generic term: there are specific differences between 
the 'satisfactions' of different entities, including gradations of intensity. 
These specific differences can only be expressed by the analysis of the com- 
ponents in the concrescence out of which the actual entity arises. The in- 
tensity of satisfaction is promoted by the 'order' in the phases from which 
concrescence arises and through which it passes; it is enfeebled by the [130] 
'disorder/ The components in the concrescence are thus 'values' con- 



The Order of Nature 85 

tributary to the 'satisfaction/ The concrescence is thus the building up 
of a determinate 'satisfaction/ which constitutes the completion of the 
actual togetherness of the discrete components. The process of concres- 
cence terminates with the attainment of a fully determinate 'satisfaction'; 
and the creativity thereby passes over into the 'given' primary phase for the 
concrescence of other actual entities. This transcendence is thereby estab- 
lished when there is attainment of determinate 'satisfaction' completing 
the antecedent entity. Completion is the perishing of immediacy: 'It never 
really is/f 

No actual entity can be conscious of its own satisfaction; for such knowl- 
edge would be a component in the process, and would thereby alter the 
satisfaction. In respect to the entity in question the satisfaction can only 
be considered as a creative determination, by which the objectifications of 
the entity beyond itself are settled. In other words, the 'satisfaction' of an 
entity can only be discussed in terms of the usefulness of that entity. It is 
a qualification of creativity. The tone of feeling embodied in this satisfac- 
tion passes into the world beyond, by reason of these objectifications. The 
world is self-creative; and the actual entity as self-creating creature passes 
into its immortal function of part-creator of the transcendent world. In its 
self-creation the actual entity is guided by its ideal of itself as individual 
satisfaction and as transcendent creator. The enjoyment of this ideal is the 
'subjective aim/ by reason of which the actual entity is a determinate 
process. 

This subjective aim is not primarily intellectual; it is the lure for feeling. 
This lure for feeling is the germ of mind. Here I am using the term 'mind' 
to mean the complex of mental operations involved in the constitution of 
an actual entity. Mental operations do not necessarily involve conscious- 
ness. The concrescence, absorb- [131] ing the derived data into immediate 
privacy, consists in mating the data with ways of feeling provocative of the 
private synthesis. These subjective ways of feeling are not merely receptive 
of the data as alien facts; they clothe the dry bones with the flesh of a real 
being, emotional, purposive, appreciative. The miracle of creation is de- 
scribed in the vision of the prophet Ezekiel: "So I prophesied as he com- 
manded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up 
upon their feet, an exceeding great army." T 

The breath of feeling which creates a new individual fact has an origina- 
tion not wholly traceable to the mere data. It conforms to the data, in that 
it feels the data. But the how of feeling, though it is germane to the data, 
is not fully determined by the data. The relevant feeling is not settled, as 
to its inclusions or exclusions of 'subjective form/ by the data about which 
the feeling is concerned. The concrescent process is the elimination of 
these indeterminations of subjective forms. The quality of feeling has to be 
definite in respect to the eternal objects with which feeling clothes itself 

1 Ezekiel, xxxvii:10.t 



86 Discussions and Applications 

in its self-definition. It is a mode of ingression of eternal objects into the 
actual occasion. But this self-definition is analysable into two phases. First, 
the conceptual ingression of the eternal objects in the double r&amp;le of being 
germane to the data and of being potentials for physical feeling. This is 
the ingression of an eternal object in the r61e of a conceptual lure for feel- 
ing. The second phase is the admission of the lure into the reality of feeling, 
or its rejection from this reality. The relevance of an eternal object in its 
role of lure is a fact inherent in the data. In this sense the eternal object 
is a constituent of the 'objective lure/ But the admission into, or rejection 
from, reality of conceptual feeling is the originative decision of the actual 
occasion. In this sense an actual occasion is causa sui. The subjective forms 
of the prehen- [132] sions in one phase of concrescence control the specific 
integrations of prehensions in later phases of that concrescence. 

An example of the lure for feeling is given by Hume himself. In the first 
section of his Treatise* he lays down the proposition, "That all our simple 
ideas in their first appearance, are derived from simple impressions ? which 
are correspondent to them, and which they exactly represent!' It must be 
remembered that in the organic philosophy the 'data of objectifications' are 
the nearest analogue to Hume's 'simple impressions/ Thus, modifying 
Hume's principle, the only lure to conceptual feeling is an exact con- 
formation to the qualities realized in the objectified actualities. But Hume 
(toe. eft.) notes an exception which carries with it the exact principle 
which has just been laid down, namely, the principle of relevant potentials, 
unrealized in the datum and yet constituent of an 'objective lure' by 
proximity to the datum. The point is that 'order' in the actual world in- 
troduces a derivative 'order' among eternal objects. Hume writes: 
There is. however, one contradictory phenomenon, which may prove, 
that it is not absolutely impossible for ideas to go before their corre- 
spondent impressions. I believe it will readily be allowed, that the sev- 
eral distinct ideas of colours, which enter by the eyes, orf those of 
sounds, which are conveyed by the hearing, are really different from 
each other, though, at the same time, resembling. Now, if this be true 
of different colours, it must be no less so of the different shades of the 
same colour, that each of them produces a distinct idea, independent of 
the rest. . . . Suppose, therefore, a person to have enjoyed his sight for 
thirty years, and to have become perfectly well acquainted with colours 
of all kinds, excepting one particular shade of blue, for instance, which 
it never hast been his fortune to meet with. Let all the different shades 
of that colour, except that single one, be placed before him, descending 
gradually from the deepest to the [133] lightest; it is plain, that he 
will perceive a blank, where that shade is wanting, and will be sensible 
that there is a greater distance in that place, betwixtt the contiguous 
colours, than in any other. Now I ask, whether it is possible for him, 
from his own imagination, to supply this deficiency, andt raise up to 
himself the idea of that particular shade, though it had never been 



The Order of Nature 87 

conveyed to him by his senses? I believe there are few but will be of 

opinion that he can; and this may serve as a proof, that the simple 

ideas are not always derived from the correspondent impressions; 

though the instance t is so particular and singular, that it is scarce 

worth our observing, and does not merit that, for it alone, we should 

alter our general maxim. 

This passage requires no comment, except for its final clause. Hume puts 
the 'instance' aside as being 'particular and singular'; it is exactly this esti- 
mate which is challenged by the philosophy of organism. The analysis of 
concrescence, here adopted, conceives that there is an origination of con- 
ceptual feeling, admitting or rejecting whatever is apt for feeling by reason 
of its germaneness to the basic data. The gradation of eternal objects in 
respect to this germaneness is the 'objective lure' for feeling; the concres- 
cent process admits a selection from this 'objective lure 7 into subjective 
efficiency. This is the subjective 'ideal of itself which guides the process. 
Also the basic data are constituted by the actual world which 'belongs to' 
that instance of concrescent process. Feelings are 'vectors'; for they feel 
what is there and transform it into what is here. 

The term 'potential difference' is an old one in physical science; and re- 
cently it has been introduced in physiology with a meaning diverse from, 
though generically allied to, its older meaning in physics. The ultimate fact 
in the constitution of an actual entity which suggests this term is the ob- 
jective lure for feeling. In the comparison of two actual entities, the con- 
trast be- \134] tween their objective lures is their 'potential difference'; and 
all other uses of this phrase are abstractions derivative from this ultimate 
meaning. 

The 'objectifications' of the actual entities in the actual world, relative to 
a definite actual entity, constitute the efficient causes out of which that 
actual entity arises; the 'subjective aim' at 'satisfaction' constitutes the final 
cause, or lure, whereby there is determinate concrescence; and that at- 
tained 'satisfaction' remains as an element in the content of creative pur- 
pose. There is, in this way, transcendence of the creativity; and this 
transcendence effects determinate objectifications for the renewal of the 
process in the concrescence of actualities beyond that satisfied superject. 

Thus an actual entity has a threefold! character: (i) it has the char- 
acter 'given' for it by the past; (ii) it has the subjective character aimed 
at in its process of concrescence; (iii) it has the superjective character, 
which is the pragmatic value of its specific satisfaction qualifying the 
transcendent creativity. 

In the case of the primordial actual entity, which is God, there is no 
past. Thus the ideal realization of conceptual feeling takes the precedence. 
God differs from other actual entities in rhe fact that Hume's principle, of 
the derivate character of conceptual feelings, does not hold for him. There 
is still, however, the same threefold character: (i) The 'primordial na- 
ture' of God is the concrescence of at unity of conceptual feelings, in- 



88 Discussions and Applications 

eluding among their data all eternal objects. The concrescence is directed 
by the subjective aim. that the subjective forms of the feelings shall be 
such as to constitute the eternal objects into relevant lures of feeling* sev- 
erally appropriate for all realizable basic conditions, (ii) The 'consequent 
nature' of God is the physical prehension by God of the actualities of the 
evolving universe. His! primordial nature directs such perspectives of ob- 
jectification that each novel actuality in the temporal world contributes 
such elements as it can to a realization in God [J 35] free from inhibitions 
of intensity by reason of discordance, (iii) The 'super jective nature' f of 
God is the character of the pragmatic value of his specific satisfaction 
qualifying the transcendent creativity in the various temporal instances. 

This is the conception of God, according to which he is considered as the 
outcome of creativity, as the foundation of order, and as the goad* to- 
wards novelty. 'Order' and 'novelty' are but the instruments of his sub- 
jective aim which is the intensification of 'formal immediacy.' It is to be 
noted that every actual entity, including God, is something individual for 
its own sake; and thereby transcends the rest of actuality. And also it is to 
be noted that every actual entity, including God, is a creature transcended 
by the creativity which it qualifies. A temporal occasion in respect to the 
second element of its character, and God in respect to the first element of 
his character satisfy Spinoza's definition of substance, that it is causa sui. 
To be causa sui means that the process of concrescence is its own reason 
for the decision in respect to the qualitative clothing of feelings. It is 
finally responsible for the decision by which any lure for feeling is ad- 
mitted to efficiency. The freedom inherent in the universe is constituted 
by this element of self-causation. 

In the subsequent discussion, 'actual entity' will be taken to mean a con- 
ditioned actual entity of the temporal world, unless God is expressly in- 
cluded in the discussion. The term 'actual occasion' will always exclude 
God from its scope. 

The philosophy of organism is the inversion of Kant's philosophy. The 
Critique of Pure Reason describes the process by which subjective data 
pass into the appearance of an objective world. Trie philosophy of organ- 
ism seeks to describe how objective data pass into subjective satisfaction, 
and how order in the objective data provides intensity in the subjective 
satisfaction. For Kant, the world emerges from the subject; for the philoso- 
phy of [J 36] organism, the subject emerges from the world— a 'super ject' 
rather than a 'subject.' The word 'object' thus means an entity which is a 
potentiality for being a component in feeling; and the word 'subject' means 
the entity constituted by the process of feeling, and including this process. 
The feeler is the unity emergent from its own feelings; and feelings are the 
details of the process intermediary between this unity and its many data. 
The data are the potentials for feeling; that is to say, they are objects. The 
process is the elimination of indeterminateness of feeling from the unity 
of one subjective experience. The degree of order in the datum is measured 



The Order of Nature 89 

by the degree of richness in the objective lure. The 'intensity 7 achieved be- 
longs to the subjective form of the satisfaction, 

SECTION II 

It has been explained in the previous section that the notion of 'order' is 
primarily applicable to the objectified data for individual actual entities. 
It has been necessary to give a sketch of some categories applying to an 
actual entity in order to show how this can be the case. But there is a 
derivative sense of the term 'order/ which is more usually in our minds 
when we use that word. We speak of the 'order of nature/ meaning 
thereby the order reigning in that limited portion of the universe, 2 or even 
of the surface of the earth, which has come under our observation. We also 
speak of a man of orderly life, or of disorderly life. In any of these senses, 
the term 'order' evidently applies to the relations among themselves en- 
joyed by many actual entities which thereby form a society. The term 
'society' will always be restricted to mean a nexus of actual entities which 
are 'ordered' among themselves in the sense to be explained in this sec- 
tion. 3 [137] The point of a 'society,' as the term is here used, is that it is 
self-sustaining; in other words, that it is its own reason. Thus a society is 
more than a set of entities to which the same class-name applies: that is 
to say, it involves more than a merely mathematical conception of 'order.' 
To constitute a society, the class-name has got to apply to each member, 
by reason of genetic derivation from other members of that same society. 
The members of the society are alike because, by reason of their common 
character, they impose on other members of the society the conditions 
which lead to that likeness. 

This likeness 4 consists in the fact that (i) a certain element of 'form' 
is a contributory component to the individual satisfaction of each member 
of the society; and that (ii) the contribution by the element to the objecti- 
fication of any one member of the society for prehension by other mem- 
bers promotes its analogous reproduction in the satisfactions of those other 
members. Thus a set of entities is a society (i) in virtue of a 'defining 
characteristic' shared by its members, and (ii) in virtue of the presence of 
the defining characteristic being due to the environment provided by the 
society itself. 

For example, the life of** man is a historic route of actual occasions 
which in a marked degree— to be discussed more fully later—inherit from 
each other. That set of occasions, dating from his first acquirement of the 

2 Cf. The Fitness of the Environment, New York, Macmiilan, 1913, The 
Order of Nature, Harvard Univ. Press, 1917, and Blood, Ha ward Univ. Press, 
1928, Ch. 1, allt by Professor L. }. Henderson. These works are fundamental 
for anv discussion of this subject. 

3 Also cf.t Part I, Ch. Ill, Sect. II. 
4 Cf. Parti, Ch. Ill, Sect. II. 



90 Discussions and Applications 

Greek language and including all those occasions up to his loss of any 
adequate knowledge of that language, constitutes a society in reference to 
knowledge of the Greek language. Such knowledge is a common character- 
istic inherited from occasion to occasion along the historic route. This 
example has purposely been chosen for its reference to a somewhat trivial 
element of order, viz. knowledge of the Greek language; a more important 
character of order would have been that complex character in virtue of 
which a man is considered to be the same enduring person from birth to 
death. Also in this in- [138] stance the members of the society are arranged 
in a serial order by their genetic relations. Such a society is said 5 to possess 
'personal order/ 

Thus a society is, for each of its members, an environment with some 
element of order in it, persisting by reason of the genetic relations between 
its own members. Such an element of order is the order prevalent in the 
society. 

But there is no society in isolation. Every society must be considered 
with its background of a wider environment of actual entities, which also 
contribute their objectifications to which the members of the society must 
conform. Thus the given contributions of the environment must at least 
be permissive of the self-sustenance of the society. Also, in proportion to 
its importance, this background must contribute those general characters 
which the more special character of the society presupposes for its mem- 
bers. But this means that the environment, together with the society in 
question, must form a larger society in respect to some more general 
characters than those defining the society from which we started. Thus we 
arrive at the principle that every society requires a social background, of 
which it is itself a part. In reference to any given society the world of actual 
entities is to be conceived as forming a background in layers of social order, 
the defining characteristics becoming wider and more general as we widen 
the background. Of course, the remote actualities of the background have 
their own specific characteristics of various types of social order. But such 
specific characteristics have become irrelevant for the society in question 
by reason of the inhibitions and attenuations introduced by discordance, 
that is to say, by disorder. 

The metaphysical characteristics of an actual entity— in the proper gen- 
eral sense of 'metaphysics'— should be those which apply to all actual en- 
tities. It may be doubted whether such metaphysical concepts have ever 
[J 39] been formulated in their strict purity— even taking into account 
the most general principles of logic and of mathematics. We have to con- 
fine ourselves to societies sufficiently wide, and yet such that their defining 
characteristics cannot safely be ascribed to all actual entities which have 
been or may be. 

The causal laws which dominate a social environment are the product 

5 Cf. Part I, Ch. Ill, Sect. II. 



The Order of Nature 91 

of the defining characteristic of that society. But the society is only efficient 
through its individual members. Thus in a society, the members can only 
exist by reason of the laws which dominate the society, and the laws only 
come into being by reason of the analogous characters of the members 
of the society. 

But there is not any perfect attainment of an ideal order whereby the 
indefinite endurance of a society is secured. A society arises from disorder, 
where 'disorder 7 is defined by reference to the ideal for that society; the 
favourable background of a larger environment either itself decays, or 
ceases to favour the persistence of the society after some stage of growth: 
the society then ceases to reproduce its members, and finally after a stage 
of decay passes out of existence. Thus a system of 'laws' determining re- 
production in some portion of the universe gradually rises into dominance; 
it has its stage of endurance, and passes out of existence with the decay 
of the society from which it emanates. 

The arbitrary, as it were 'given/ elements in the laws of nature warn us 
that we are in a special cosmic epoch. Here the phrase 'cosmic epoch' is 
used to mean that widest society of actual entities whose immediate rele- 
vance to ourselves is traceable. This epoch is characterized by electronic 
and protonic actual entities, and by yet more ultimate actual entities which 
can be dimly discerned in the quanta of energy. Maxwell's equations of 
the electromagnetic field hold sway by reason of the throngs of electrons 
and of protons. Also each electron is a society of electronic occasions, and 
each proton is a soci- [MO] ety of protonic occasions. These occasions are 
the reasons for the electromagnetic laws; but their capacity for reproduc- 
tion, whereby each electron and each proton has a long life, and whereby 
new electrons and new protons come into being, is itself due to these same 
laws. But there is disorder in the sense that the laws are not perfectly 
obeyed, and that the reproduction is mingled with instances of failure. 
There is accordingly a gradual transition to new types of order, supervening 
upon a gradual rise into dominance on the part of the present natural 
laws. 

But the arbitrary factors in the order of nature are not confined to the 
electromagnetic laws. There are the four dimensions of the spatio-temporal 
continuum, the geometrical axioms, even the mere dimensional character 
of the continuum— apart from the particular number of dimensions— and 
the fact of measurability. In later chapters (cf. Part IV) it will be evident 
that all these properties are additional to the more basic fact of extensive- 
ness; also, that even extensiveness allows of grades of specialization, arbi- 
trarily one way or another, antecedently to the introduction of any of these 
additional notions. By this discovery the logical and mathematical investi- 
gations of the last two centuries are very relevant to philosophy. For the 
cosmological theories of Descartes, Newton, Locke, Hume, and Kant were 
framed in ignorance of that fact. Indeed, in the Timaeus Plato seems to be 
more aware of it than any of his successors, in the sense that he frames 



92 Discussions and Applications 

statements whose meaning is elucidated by its explicit recognition. These 
'given 7 factors in geometry point to the wider society of which the elec- 
tronic cosmic epoch constitutes a fragment. 

A society does not in any sense create the complex of eternal objects 
which constitutes its defining characteristic. It only elicits that complex 
into importance for its members, and secures the reproduction of its mem- 
bership. In speaking of a society—unless the context ex- [141] pressly re- 
quires another interpretation— 'membership' will always refer to the actual 
occasions, and not to subordinate enduring objects composed of actual 
occasions such as the life of an electron or of a man. These latter societies 
are the strands of 'personal' order which enter into many societies; gen- 
erally speaking, whenever we are concerned with occupied space, we are 
dealing with this restricted type of corpuscular societies; and whenever 
we are thinking of the physical field in empty space, we are dealing with 
societies of the wider type. It seems as if the careers of waves of light illus- 
trate the transition from the more restricted type to the wider type. 

Thus our cosmic epoch is to be conceived primarily as a society of elec- 
tromagnetic occasions, including electronic and protonic occasions, and 
only occasionally— for the sake of brevity in statement—as a society of elec- 
trons and protons. There is the same distinction between thinking of an 
army either as a class of men, or as a class of regiments. 

SECTION III 

Thus the physical relations, the geometrical relations of measurement, 
the dimensional relations, and the various grades of extensive relations, 
involved in the physical and geometrical theory of nature, are derivative 
from a series of societies of increasing width of prevalence, the more spe- 
cial societies being included in the wider societies. This situation consti- 
tutes the physical and geometrical order of nature. Beyond these societies 
there is disorder, where 'disorder' is a relative term expressing the lack of 
importance possessed by the defining characteristics of the societies in 
question beyond their own bounds. When those societies decay, it will not 
mean that their defining characteristics cease to exist; but that they lapse 
into unimportance for the actual entities in question. The term 'disorder' 
refers to a society only partially influential in impressing its characteristics 
in the [142] form of prevalent laws. This doctrine, that order is a social 
product, appears in modern science as the statistical theory of the laws of 
nature, and in the emphasis on genetic relation. 

But there may evidently be a state in which there are no prevalent so- 
cieties securing any congruent unity of effect. This is a state of chaotic 
disorder; it is disorder approaching an absolute sense of that term. In such 
an ideal state, what is 'given' for any actual entity is the outcome of 
thwarting, contrary decisions from the settled world. Chaotic disorder 
means lack of dominant definition of compatible contrasts in the satisfac- 



The Order of Nature 93 

tions attained, and consequent enfeeblement of intensity. It means the 
lapse towards slighter actuality. It is a natural figure of speech, but only 
a figure of speech, to conceive a slighter actuality as being an approach 
towards nonentity. But you cannot approach nothing; for there is nothing 
to approach. It is an approach towards the futility of being a faint compro- 
mise between contrary reasons. The dominance of societies, harmoniously 
requiring each other, is the essential condition for depth of satisfaction. 

The Timaeus of Plato, and the Scholium of Newton— the latter already 
in large part quoted— are the two statements of cosmological theory which 
have had the chief influence on Western thought. To the modern reader, 
the Timaeus, considered as a statement of scientific details, is in compar- 
ison with the Scholium simply foolish. But what it lacks in superficial de- 
tail, it makes up for by its philosophic depth. If it be read as an allegory, 
it conveys profound truth; whereas the Scholium is an immensely able 
statement of details which, although abstract and inadequate as a philoso- 
phy, can within certain limits be thoroughly trusted for the deduction of 
truths at the same level of abstraction as itself. The penalty of its philo- 
sophical deficiency is that the Scholium conveys no hint of the limits of 
its own application. The practical effect is that the readers, and almost 
certainly Newton himself, so construe its meaning as to fall into [143} what 
I have elsewhere 6 termed the 'fallacy of misplaced concreteness/ It is the 
office of metaphysics to determine the limits of the applicability of such 
abstract notions. 

The Scholium betrays its abstractness by affording no hint of that aspect 
of self-production, of generation, of cf&gt;6ai&lt;;, of natura naturans, which is 
so prominent in nature. For the Scholium, nature is merely, and com- 
pletely, there, externally designed and obedient. The full sweep of the 
modern doctrine of evolution would have confused the Newton of the 
Scholium, but would have enlightened the Plato of the Timaeus. So far 
as Newton is concerned, we have his own word for this statement. In a 
letter to Bentley, he writes: "When I wrote my treatise about our system, 
I had an eye upon such principles as might work with considering men for 
the belief of a Deity; . . ." 7 The concept in Newton's mind is that of a 
fully articulated system requiring a definite supernatural origin with that 
articulation. This is the form of the cosmological argument, now generally 
abandoned as invalid; because our notion of causation concerns the rela- 
tions of states of things within the actual world, and can only be illegit- 
imately extended to a transcendent derivation. The notion of God, which 
will be discussed later (cf. Part V), is that of an actual entity immanent 
in the actual world, but transcending any finite cosmic epoch — a being at 
once actual, eternal, immanent, and transcendent. The transcendence of 

6 Cf. Science and the\ Modern World, Ch. III. 

7 This quotation is taken from Jebb's Life of Bentley, Ch. II. The Life is pub- 
lished in the English Men of Letters series. 



94 Discussions and Applications 

God is not peculiar to him. Every actual entity, in virtue ot its novelty, 
transcends its universe, God included. 

In the Scholium, space and time, with all their current mathematical 
properties, are ready-made for the material masses; the material masses are 
ready-made for the 'forces' which constitute their action and reaction; and 
space, and time, and material masses, and forces, are [144] alike ready- 
made for the initial motions which the Deity impresses throughout the 
universe. It is not possible to extract from the Scholium— construed with 
misplaced concreteness— either a theism, or an atheism, or an epistemology, 
which can survive a comparison with the facts. This is the inescapable 
conclusion to be inferred from Hume's Dialogues Concerning Natural Re- 
ligion. Biology is also reduced to a mystery; and finally physics itself has 
now reached a stage of experimental knowledge inexplicable in terms of 
the categories of the Scholium. 

In the Timaeus, there are many phrases and statements which find their 
final lucid expression in the Scholium. While noting this concurrence of 
the two great cosmological documents guiding Western thought, it can- 
not be too clearly understood that, within its limits of abstraction, what 
the Scholium says is true, and that it is expressed with the lucidity of 
genius. Thus any cosmological document which cannot be read as an inter- 
pretation of the Scholium is worthless. But there is another side to the 
Timaeus which finds no analogy in the Scholium. In general terms, this 
side of the Timaeus may be termed its metaphysical character, that is to 
say, its endeavour to connect the behaviour of things with the formal na- 
ture of things. The behaviour apart from the things is abstract, and so are 
the things apart from their behaviour. Newton— wisely, for his purposes- 
made this abstraction which the Timaeus endeavours to avoid. 

In the first place, the Timaeus connects behaviour with the ultimate 
molecular characters of the actual entities. Plato conceives the notion of 
definite societies of actual molecular entities, each society with its de- 
fining characteristics. He does not conceive this assemblage of societies as 
causa sui. But he does conceive it as the work of subordinate deities, who 
are the animating principles of those departments of nature. In Greek 
thought, either poetic or philosophic, the separation between the cpOoiq 
and such deities had not that absolute character which it has for us who 
have inherited the Semitic Jehovah. 

[J 45] Newton could have accepted a molecular theory as easily as Plato, 
but there is this difference between them: Newton would have been sur- 
prised at the modern quantum theory and at the dissolution of quanta into 
vibrations; Plato would have expected it. While we note the many things 
said by Plato in the Timaeus which are now foolishness, we must also give 
him credit for that aspect of his teaching in which he was two thousand 
years ahead of his time. Plato accounted for the sharp-cut differences be- 
tween kinds of natural things, by assuming an approximation of the mole- 



The Order of Nature 95 

cules of the fundamental kinds respectively to the mathematical forms of 
the regular solids. He also assumed that certain qualitative contrasts in oc- 
currences, such as that between musical notes, depended on the participa- 
tion of these occurrences in some of the simpler ratios between integral 
numbers. He thus obtained a reason why there should be an approxima- 
tion to sharp-cut differences between kinds of molecules, and why there 
should be sharp-cut relations of harmony standing out amid dissonance. 
Thus 'contrast'— as the opposite of incompatibility—depends on a certain 
simplicity of circumstance; but the higher contrasts depend on the assem- 
blage of a multiplicity of lower contrasts, this assemblage again exhibiting 
higher types of simplicity. 

It is well to remember that the modern quantum theory, + with its sur- 
prises in dealing with the atom, is only the latest instance of a well-marked 
character of nature, which in each particular instance is only explained by 
some ad hoc dogmatic assumption. The theory of biological evolution 
would not in itself lead us to expect the sharply distinguished genera and 
species which we find in nature. There might be an occasional bunching of 
individuals round certain typical forms; but there is no explanation of the 
almost complete absence of intermediate forms. Again Newton's Scholium 
gives no hint of the ninety-two possibilities for atoms, or of the limited 
number of ways in which atoms can be combined so as to form molecules. 
Physicists are now explaining these [J 46] chemical facts by means of con- 
ceptions which Plato would have welcomed. 

There is another point in which the organic philosophy only repeats 
Plato. In the Timaeus the origin of the present cosmic epoch is traced back 
to an aboriginal disorder, chaotic according to our ideals. This is the evolu- 
tionary doctrine of the philosophy of organism. Plato's notion has puz- 
zled critics who are obsessed with the Semitic 8 theory of a wholly tran- 
scendent God creating out of nothing an accidental universe. Newton held 
the Semitic theory. The Scholium made no provision for the evolution of 
matter— very naturally, since the topic lay outside its scope. The result has 
been that the non-evolution of matter has been a tacit presupposition 
throughout modern thought. Until the last few years the sole alternatives 
were: either the material universe, with its present type of order, is eternal; 
or else it came into being, and will pass out of being, according to the fiat 
of Jehovah. Thus, on all sides, Plato's allegory of the evolution of a new 
type of order based on new types of dominant societies became a daydream, 
puzzling to commentators. 

Milton, curiously enough, in his Paradise Lost wavers between the 
Timaeus and the Semitic doctrine. This is only another instance of the 
intermixture of classical and Hebrew notions on which his charm of 



8 The book of Genesis is too primitive to bear upon this point. 



96 Discussions and Applications 

thought depends. In the description of Satan's journey across Chaos, Satan 
discovers 

The secrets of the hoary deep, a dark 

Illimitable ocean, without bound, 

Without dimension, where length, breadth and highth, 

And time and place are lost; where eldest Night f 

And Chaos, ancestors of Nature, hold 

Eternal anarchy amidst the noise 

Of endless wars, and by confusion stand. 9 

Milton is here performing for Plato the same poetic service that Lucre- 
tius performed for Democritus—with [147] less justification, since Plato 
was quite capable of being his own poet. Also the fact of Satan's journey 
helped to evolve order; for he left a permanent track, useful for the devils 
and the damned. 

The appeal to Plato in this section has been an appeal to the facts 
against the modes of expression prevalent in the last few centuries. These 
recent modes of expression are partly the outcome of a mixture of theology 
and philosophy, and are partly due to the Newtonian physics, no longer 
accepted as a fundamental statement. But language and thought have been 
framed according to that mould; and it is necessary to remind ourselves 
that this is not the way in which the world has been described by some of 
the greatest intellects. Both for Plato and for Aristotle the process of the 
actual world has been conceived as a real incoming of forms into real po- 
tentiality, issuing into that real togetherness which is an actual thing. 
Also, for the Timaeus, the creation of the world is the incoming of a type 
of order establishing a cosmic epoch. It is not the beginning of matter of 
fact, but the incoming of a certain type of social order. 

SECTION IV 

The remainder of this chapter will be devoted to a discussion— largely 
conjectural— of the hierarchy of societies composing our present epoch. In 
this way, the preceding discussion of 'order' may be elucidated. It is to be 
carefully noted that we are now deserting metaphysical generality. We shall 
be considering the more special possibilities of explanation consistent with 
our general cosmological doctrine, but not necessitated by it. 

The physical world is bound together by a general type of relatedness 
which constitutes it into an extensive continuum. When we analyse the 
properties of this continuum we discover that they fall into two classes, of 
which one— the more special— presupposes the other— the more general. 10 
The more general type of properties [148] expresses the mere fact of 'ex- 
tensive connection/ of 'whole and part/ of various types of 'geometrical 

9 Paradise Lost, Bk. II. 

10 Cf. Part IV for a detailed discussion. 



The Order of Nature 97 

elements' derivable by 'extensive abstraction ; but excluding the introduc- 
tion of more special properties by which straight lines are definable xl and 
measurability thereby introduced. 

In these general properties of extensive connection, we discern the de- 
fining characteristic of a vast nexus extending far beyond our immediate 
cosmic epoch. It contains in itself other epochs, with more particular 
characteristics incompatible with each other. Then from the standpoint of 
our present epoch, the fundamental society in so far as it transcends our 
own epoch seems a vast confusion mitigated by the few, faint elements of 
order contained in its own defining characteristic of 'extensive connection. 7 
We cannot discriminate its other epochs of vigorous order, and we merely 
conceive it as harbouring the faint flush of the dawn of order in our own 
epoch. This ultimate, vast society constitutes the whole environment within 
which our epoch is set, so far as systematic characteristics are discernible 
by us in our present stage of development. In the future the growth of 
theory may endow our successors with keener powers of discernment. 

Our logical analysis, in company with immediate intuition (inspectio), 
enables us to discern a more special society within the society of pure ex- 
tension. This is the 'geometrical 7 society. In this society 12 those specialized 
relationships hold, in virtue of which straight lines are defined. Systematic 
geometry is illustrated in such a geometrical society; and metrical rela- 
tionships can be defined in terms of the analogies of function within the 
scheme of any one systematic geometry. These 'analogies of function 7 are 
what is meant by the notion of 'congruence. 7 This notion is nonsense apart 
from a systematic geometry. The inclusion of extensive quantity [149] 
among fundamental categoreal notions is a complete mistake. This notion 
is definable in terms of each systematic geometry finding its application in a 
geometrical society. It is to be noticed that a systematic geometry is deter- 
mined by the definition of straight lines applicable to the society in ques- 
tion. Contrary to the general opinio^ this definition is possible in inde- 
pendence of the notion of 'measurement. 7 It cannot however be proved 
that in the same geometrical society there may not be competing families 
of loci with equal claims to the status of being a complete family of straight 
lines. 

Given a family of straight lines, expressing a system of relatedness in a 
'geometric 7 society, the notion of 'congruence 7 and thence of 'measurement 7 
is now determinable in a systematic way throughout the society. But again 
in this case there certainly are competing systems of measurement. Hence 
in connection with each family of straight lines— allowing there be more 
than one such family— there are alternative systems 13 of metrical geom- 

^ Cf. Part IV, Chs.t III, IV, V. 

12 Cf . Part IV, especially Chs. Ill, IV, V. 

13 The existence of alternative systems was demonstrated by Cayley in his 
"Sixth Memoir on Quantics" in Transactions of the Royal Society, 1859.t 



98 Discussions and Applications 

etry, no one system being more fundamental than the other. Our present 
cosmic epoch is formed by an 'electromagnetic 7 society, which is a more 
special society contained within the geometric society. In this society yet 
more special defining characteristics obtain. These characteristics presup- 
pose those of the two wider societies within which the 'electromagnetic' 
society is contained. But in the ''electromagnetic' society the ambiguity as 
to the relative importance of competing families of straight lines (if there 
be such competing families), and the ambiguity as to the relative im- 
portance of competing definitions of congruence, are determined in favour 
of one family and one 14 congruence-definition. This determination is 
effected by an additional set of physical relationships throughout the so- 
ciety. But this set has lost [ISO] its merely systematic character because it 
constitutes our neighbourhood. These relationships involve components ex- 
pressive of certain individual diversities, and identities between the occa- 
sions which are the members of the nexus. But these diversities and iden- 
tities are correlated according to a systematic law expressible in terms of the 
systematic measurements derived from the geometric nexus. We here 
arrive at the notion of physical quantities which vary from individual to 
individual; this is the notion of the systematization of individual differ- 
ences, the notion of Taw/ 

It is the ideal of mathematical physicists to formulate this systematic 
law in its complete generality for our epoch. It is sufficient for our purposes 
to indicate the presumed character of this law by naming the members of 
the society 'electromagnetic occasions/ Thus our present epoch is domi- 
nated by a society of electromagnetic occasions. In so far as this dominance 
approaches completeness, the systematic law which physics seeks is ab- 
solutely dominant. In so far as the dominance is incomplete, the obedience 
is a statistical fact with its corresponding lapses. 

The electromagnetic society exhibits the physical electromagnetic field 
which is the topic of physical science. The members of this nexus are the 
electromagnetic occasions. 

But in its turn, this electromagnetic society would provide no adequate 
order for the production of individual occasions realizing peculiar 'inten- 
sities 7 of experience unless it were pervaded by more special societies, 
vehicles of such order. The physical world exhibits a bewildering com- 
plexity of such societies, favouring each other, competing with each other. 

The most general examples of such societies are the regular trains of 
waves, individual electrons, protons, individual molecules, societies of 
molecules such as inorganic bodies, living cells, and societies of cells such 
as vegetable and animal bodies. 

14 The transformations into an indefinite variety of coordinates, to which the 
'tensor theory' refers, all presuppose one congruence-definition. t The invariance 
of the Einsteinian *ds' expresses this fact. 



The Order of Nature 99 

SECTION V 

[151] It is obvious that the simple classification (cf. Part I, Ch. Ill, Sect. 
II) of societies into 'enduring objects/ 'corpuscular societies/ and 'non- 
corpuscular societies' requires amplification. The notion of a society which 
includes subordinate societies and nexus with a definite pattern of struc- 
tural inter-relations f must be introduced. Such societies will be termed 
'structured/ 

A structured society as a whole provides a favourable environment for 
the subordinate societies which it harbours within itself. Also the whole 
society must be set in a wider environment permissive of its continuance. 
Some of the component groups of occasions in a structured society can be 
termed 'subordinate societies/ But other such groups must be given the 
wider designation of 'subordinate nexus/ The distinction arises because in 
some instances a group of occasions, such as ? for example, a particular en- 
during entity, could have retained the dominant features of its defining 
characteristic in the general environment, apart from the structured society. 
It would have lost some features; in other words, the analogous sort of 
enduring entity in the general environment is, in its mode of definiteness, 
not quite identical with the enduring entity within the structured environ- 
ment. But, abstracting such additional details from the generalized de- 
fining characteristic, the enduring object with that generalized character- 
istic may be conceived as independent of the structured society within 
which it finds itself. t For example, we speak of a molecule within a living 
cell, because its general molecular features are independent of the environ- 
ment of the cell. Thus a molecule is a subordinate society in the structured 
society which we call the 'living cell/ 

But there may be other nexus included in a structured society which, 
excepting the general systematic characteristics of the external environ- 
ment, present no features capable of genetically sustaining themselves apart 
from [152] the special environment provided by that structured society. 
It is misleading, therefore, to term such a nexus a 'society' when it is be- 
ing considered in abstraction from the whole structured society. In such an 
abstraction it can be assigned no 'social' features. Recurring to the example 
of a living cell, it will be argued that the occasions composing the 'empty 7 
space within the cell exhibit special features which analogous occasions out- 
side the cell are devoid of. Thus the nexus, which is the empty space within 
a living cell, is called a 'subordinate nexus/ but not a 'subordinate society/ 

Molecules are structured societies, and so in all probability are separate 
electrons and protons. Crystals are structured societies. But gases are not 
structured societies in any important sense of that term; although their 
individual molecules are structured societies. 

It must be remembered that each individual occasion within a special 
form of society includes features which do not occur in analogous occasions 



100 Discussions and Applications 

in the external environment. The first stage of systematic investigation 
must always be the identification of analogies between occasions within the 
society and occasions without it. The second stage is constituted by the 
more subtle procedure of noting the differences between behaviour within 
and without the society, differences t of behaviour exhibited by occasions 
which also have close analogies to each other. The history of science is 
marked by the vehement, dogmatic denial of such differences, until they 
are found out. 

An obvious instance of such distinction of behaviour is afforded by the 
notion of the deformation of the shape of an electron according to varia- 
tions in its physical situation. 

A 'structured society 7 may be more or less 'complex' in respect to the 
multiplicity of its associated sub-societies and sub-nexus and to the intricacy 
of their structural pattern. 

A structured society which is highly complex can be [153] correspond- 
ingly favourable to intensity of satisfaction for certain sets of its com- 
ponent members. This intensity arises by reason of the ordered complexity 
of the contrasts which the society stages for these components.! 

The structural relations gather intensity from this intensity in the in- 
dividual experiences. Thus the growth of a complex structured society 
exemplifies the general purpose pervading nature. The mere complexity of 
givenness which procures incompatibilities has been superseded by the 
complexity of order which procures contrasts. 

SECTION VI 

The doctrine that every society requires a wider social environment 
leads to the distinction that a society may be more or less 'stabilized' in 
reference to certain sorts of changes in that environment. A society is 
'stabilized' in reference to a species of change when it can persist through 
an environment whose relevant parts exhibit that sort of change. If the 
society would cease to persist through an environment with that sort of 
heterogeneity, then the society is in that respect 'unstable/ A complex so- 
ciety which is stable provided that the environment exhibits certain fea- 
tures t is said to be 'specialized 7 in respect to those features. The notion of 
'specialization 7 seems to include both that of 'complexity 7 and that of 
strictly conditioned 'stability/ 

An unspecialized society can survive through important changes in its 
environment. This means that it can take on different functions in respect 
to its relationship to a changing environment. In general the defining char- 
acteristic of such a society will not include any particular determination 
of structural pattern. By reason of this flexibility of structural pattern, the 
society can adopt that special pattern adapted to the circumstances of the 
moment. Thus an unspecialized society is apt to be deficient in structural 
pattern, when viewed as a whole. 



The Order of Nature 101 

[154] Thus in general an unspecialized society does not secure conditions 
favourable for intensity of satisfaction among its members, whereas t a 
structured society with a high grade of complexity will in general be de- 
ficient in survival value. In other words, such societies will in general be 
'specialized' in the sense of requiring a very special sort of environment. 

Thus the problem t for Nature is the production of societies which are 
'structured' with a high 'complexity/ and which are at the same time 'un- 
specialized. 7 In this way, intensity is mated with survival. 

SECTION VII 

There are two ways in which structured societies have solved this prob- 
lem. Both ways depend on that enhancement of the mental pole, which 
is a factor in intensity of experience. One way is by eliciting a massive 
average objectification of a nexus, while eliminating the detailed diversities 
of the various members of the nexus in question. This method, in fact, 
employs the device of blocking out unwelcome detail. It depends on the 
fundamental truth that objectification is abstraction. It utilizes this abstrac- 
tion inherent in objectification so as to dismiss the thwarting elements of a 
nexus into negative prehensions. At the same time the complex intensity 
in the structured society is supported by the massive objectifications of the 
many environmental nexus, each in its unity as one nexus, and not in its 
multiplicity as many actual occasions. 

This mode of solution requires the intervention of mentality operating in 
accordance with the Category of Transmutation (i.e., Categoreal Obliga- 
tion VI ) . It ignores diversity of detail by overwhelming the nexus by means 
of some congenial uniformity which pervades it. The environment may 
then change indefinitely so far as concerns the ignored details— so long as 
they can be ignored. 

The close association of all physical bodies, organic and [155] inorganic 
alike, with 'presented loci' definable 15 by straight lines, suggests that this 
development of mentality is characteristic of the actual occasions which 
make up the structured societies which we know as 'material bodies; This 
close association is evidenced by the importance of 'acceleration' in the 
science of dynamics.! For 'acceleration 7 is nothing else than a mode of 
estimating the shift from one family of 'presented loci' to another such 
family (cf. Part IV). 

Such mentality represents the first grade of ascent beyond the mere re- 
productive stage which employs nothing more than the Category of Con- 
ceptual Reproduction (i.e., Categoreal Obligation IV). There is some 
initiative of conceptual integration, but no originality in conceptual pre- 
hension. This initiative belongs to the Category of Transmutation, and the 
excluded originality belongs to the Category of Reversion. 

15 Cf. Ch. IV of this Partt and also Part IV. 



102 Discussions and Applications 

These material bodies belong to the lowest grade of structured societies 
which are obvious to our gross apprehensions. They comprise societies of 
various types of complexity— crystals, rocks, planets, and suns. Such bodies 
are easily the most long-lived of the structured societies known to us, 
capable of being traced through their individual life-histories. 

The second way of solving the problem is by an initiative in conceptual 
prehensions, i.e., in appetition. The purpose of this initiative is to receive 
the novel elements of the environment into explicit feelings with such sub- 
jective forms as conciliate them with the complex experiences proper to 
members of the structured society. Thus in each concrescent occasion its 
subjective aim originates novelty to match the novelty of the environment. 

In the case of the higher organisms, this conceptual initiative amounts to 
thinking about the diverse experiences; in the case of lower organisms,! this 
conceptual initiative merely amounts to thoughtless adjustment of aesthetic 
emphasis in obedience to an ideal of harmony. [156] In either case the 
creative determination which transcends the occasion in question has been 
deflected by an impulse original to that occasion. This deflection in general 
originates a self-preservative reaction throughout the whole society. It may 
be unfortunate or inadequate; and in the case of persistent failure we are 
in the province of pathology. 

This second mode of solution also presupposes the former mode. Thus 
the Categories of Conceptual Reversion and of Transmutation are both 
called into play. 

Structured societies in which the second mode of solution has im- 
portance are termed 'living/ It is obvious that a structured society may have 
more or less 'life/ and that there is no absolute gap between living' and 
'non-living 7 societies. For certain purposes, whatever 'life' there is in a 
society may be important; and for other purposes, unimportant. 

A structured society in which the second mode is unimportant, and the 
first mode is important will be termed 'inorganic' 

In accordance with this doctrine of life, 7 the primary meaning of 'life' 
is the origination of conceptual novelty— novelty of appetition. Such origi- 
nation can only occur in accordance with the Category of Reversion. Thus 
a society is only to be termed 'living' in a derivative sense. A 'living society' 
is one which includes some 'living occasions.' Thus a society may be more 
or less 'living,' according to the prevalence in it of living occasions. Also 
an occasion may be more or less living according to the relative importance 
of the novel factors in its final satisfaction. 

Thus the two ways in which dominant members of structured societies 
secure stability amid environmental novelties are (i) elimination of diver- 
sities of detail, and (ii) origination of novelties of conceptual reaction. As 
the result, there is withdrawal or addition of those details of emphasis 
whereby the subjective aim directs the [157] integration of prehensions in 
the concrescent phases of dominant members. 



The Order of Nature 103 

SECTION VIII 

There is yet another factor in 'living 7 societies which requires more de- 
tached analysis. A structured society consists in the patterned intertwining 
of various nexus with markedly diverse defining characteristics. Some of 
these nexus are of lower types than others, and some will be of markedly 
higher types. There will be the 'subservient' nexus and the 'regnant 7 nexus 
within the same structured society. This structured society will provide the 
immediate environment which sustains each of its sub-societies, subservient 
and regnant alike. In a living society only some of its nexus will be such 
that the mental poles of all their members have any original reactions. 
These will be its 'entirely living 7 nexus, and in practice a society is only 
called 'living 7 when such nexus are regnant. Thus a living society involves 
nexus which are 'inorganic/ and nexus which are inorganic do not need 
the protection of the whole 'living 7 society for their survival in a changing 
external I environment. Such nexus are societies. But 'entirely living 7 nexus 
do require such protection, if they are to survive. According to this con- 
jectural theory, an 'entirely living 7 nexus is not a 'society. 7 This is the theory 
of the animal body, including a unicellular body as a particular instance. 
A complex inorganic system of interaction is built up for the protection of 
the 'entirely living 7 nexus, and the originative actions of the living elements 
are protective of the whole system. On the other hand, the reactions! of 
the whole system provide the intimate environment required by the 'en- 
tirely living 7 nexus. We do not know of any living society devoid of its sub- 
servient apparatus of inorganic societies. 

'Physical Physiology deals with the subservient inorganic apparatus; and 
'Psychological Physiology 7 seeks to deal with 'entirely living 7 nexus, partly 
in abstraction [158] from the inorganic apparatus, and partly in respect to 
their response to the inorganic apparatus, and partly in regard to their 
response to each other. Physical Physiology has, in the last century, estab- 
lished itself as a unified science; Psychological Physiology is still in the 
process of incubation. 

It must be remembered that an integral living society, as we know it, not 
only includes the subservient inorganic apparatus, but also includes many 
living nexus,t at least one for each 'cell/ 

SECTION IX 

It will throw light upon the cosmology of the philosophy of organism to 
conjecture some fundamental principles of Psychological Physiology as 
suggested by that cosmology and by the preceding conjectures concerning 
the 'societies 7 of our epoch. These principles are not necessitated by this 
cosmology; but they seem to be the simplest principles which are both 
consonant with that cosmology, and also fit the facts. 



104 Discussions and Applications 

In the first instance, consider a single living cell. Such a cell includes 
subservient inorganic societies, such as molecules and electrons. Thus, the 
cell is an 'animal body'; and we must presuppose the physical physiology 7 
proper to this instance. But what of the individual living occasions? 

The first question to be asked is as to whether the living occasions, in 
abstraction from the inorganic occasions of the animal body, form a cor- 
puscular sub-society, so that each living occasion is a member of an en- 
during entity with its personal order. In particular we may ask whether 
this corpuscular society reduces to the extreme instance of such a society, 
namely, to one enduring entity with its one personal order. f 

The evidence before us is of course extremely slight; but so far as it 
goes, it suggests a negative answer to both these questions. A cell gives no 
evidence whatever of a single unified mentality, guided in each of its occa- 
[J59] sions by inheritance from its own past. The problem to be solved is 
that of a certain originality in the response of a cell to external stimulus. 
The theory of an enduring entity with its inherited mentality gives us a 
reason why this mentality should be swayed by its own past. We ask for 
something original at the moment, and we are provided with a reason for 
limiting originality. Life is a bid for freedom: an enduring entity binds 
any one of its occasions to the line of its ancestry. The doctrine of the 
enduring soul with its permanent characteristics is exactly the irrelevant 
answer to the problem which life presents. That problem is, How can there 
be originality? And the answer explains how the soul need be no more 
original than a stone. 

The theory of a corpuscular society, made up of many enduring entities, 
fits the evidence no better. The same objections apply. The root fact is that 
'endurance 7 is a device whereby an occasion is peculiarly bound by a single 
line of physical ancestry, while 'life 7 means novelty, introduced in accord- 
ance with the Category of Conceptual Reversion. There are the same 
objections to many traditions as there are to one tradition. What has to be 
explained is originality of response to stimulus. This amounts to the doc- 
trine that an organism is 'alive 7 when in some measure its reactions are 
inexplicable by any tradition of pure physical inheritance. 

Explanation by 'tradition 7 is merely another phraseology for explana- 
tion by 'efficient cause. 7 We require explanation by 'final cause. 7 Thus a 
single occasion is alive when the subjective aim which determines its pro- 
cess of concrescence has introduced a novelty of definiteness not to be 
found in the inherited data of its primary phase. The novelty is introduced 
conceptually and disturbs the inherited 'responsive 7 adjustment of subjec- 
tive forms. It alters the 'values/ in the artist's sense of that term. 

It follows from these considerations that in abstraction from its animal 
body an 'entirely living* nexus is not [J 60] properly a society at all, since 
'life' cannot be a defining characteristic. It is the name for originality, and 
not for tradition. The mere response to stimulus is characteristic of all 
societies whether inorganic or alive. Action and reaction are bound to- 



The Order of Nature 105 

gether. The characteristic of life is reaction adapted to the capture of in- 
tensity, under a large variety of circumstances. But the reaction is dictated 
by the present and not by the past. It is the clutch at vivid immediacy. 

SECTION X 

Another characteristic of a living society is that it requires food. In a 
museum the crystals are kept under glass cases; in zoological gardens the 
animals are fed. Having regard to the universality of reactions with envi- 
ronment, the distinction is not quite absolute. It cannot, however, be 
ignored. The crystals are not agencies requiring the destruction of elab- 
orate societies derived from the environment; a living society is such an 
agency. The societies which it destroys are its food. This food is destroyed 
by dissolving it into somewhat simpler social elements. It has been robbed 
of something. Thus, all societies require interplay with their environment; 
and in the case of living societies this interplay takes the form of robbery. 
The living society may, or may not, be a higher type of organism than the 
food which it disintegrates. But whether or no it be for the general good, 
life is robbery. It is at this point that with life morals become acute. The 
robber requires justification. 

The primordial appetitions which jointly constitute God's purpose are 
seeking intensity, and not preservation. Because they are primordial, there 
is nothing to preserve. He, in his primordial nature, is unmoved by love for 
this particular, or that particular; for in this foundational process of crea- 
tivity, there are no preconstituted particulars. In the foundations of his 
being, God is indifferent alike to preservation and to novelty. [161] He 
cares not whether an immediate occasion be old or new, so far as concerns 
derivation from its ancestry. His aim 16 for it is depth of satisfaction as an 
intermediate step towards the fulfilment of his own being. His tenderness 
is directed towards each actual occasion, as it arises. 

Thus God's purpose in the creative advance is the evocation of inten- 
sities. The evocation of societies is purely subsidiary to this absolute end. 
The characteristic of a living society is that a complex structure of in- 
organic societies is woven together for the production of a non-social nexus 
characterized by the intense physical experiences of its members. But such 
an experience is derivate from the complex order of the material animal 
body, and not from the simple 'personal order' of past occasions with 
analogous experience. There is intense experience without the shackle of 
reiteration from the past. This is the condition for spontaneity of concep- 
tual reaction. The conclusion to be drawn from this argument is that life 
is a characteristic of 'empty space' and not of space 'occupied' by any cor- 
puscular society. In a nexus of living occasions, there is a certain social 
deficiency. Life lurks in the interstices of each living cell, and in the in- 

16 Cf. Part V. 



106 Discussions and Applications 

terstices of the brain. In the history of a living society, its more vivid 
manifestations wander to whatever quarter is receiving from the animal 
body an enormous variety of physical experience. This experience, if 
treated inorganically, must be reduced to compatibility by the normal ad- 
justments of mere responsive reception. This means the dismissal of in- 
compatible elements into negative prehensions. 

The complexity of the animal body is so ordered that in the critical por- 
tions of its interstices the varied datum of physical experience is complex, 
and on the edge of a compatibility beyond that to be achieved by mere in- 
organic treatment. A novel conceptual prehension disturbs [162] the sub- 
jective forms of the initial responsive phase. Some negative prehensions are 
thus avoided, and higher contrasts are introduced into experience. 

So far as the functioning of the animal body is concerned, the total 
result is that the transmission of physical influence, through the empty 
space within it, has not been entirely in conformity with the physical laws 
holding for inorganic societies. The molecules within an animal body ex- 
hibit certain peculiarities of behaviour not to be detected outside an animal 
body. In fact, living societies illustrate the doctrine that the laws of nature 
develop together with societies which constitute an epoch. There are sta- 
tistical expressions of the prevalent types of interaction. In a living cell, the 
statistical balance has been disturbed. 

The connection of 'food' with 'life' is now evident. The highly complex 
inorganic societies required for the structure of a cell, or other living body, 
lose their stability amid the diversity of the environment. But, in the 
physical field of empty space produced by the originality of living occasions, 
chemical dissociations and associations take place which would not other- 
wise occur. The structure is breaking down and being repaired. The food 
is that supply of highly complex societies from the outside which, under the 
influence of life, will enter into the necessary associations to repair the 
waste. Thus life acts as though it were a catalytic agent. 

The short summary of this account of a living cell is as follows: (i) an 
extremely complex and delicately poised chemical structure; (ii) for the 
occasions in the interstitial f 'empty' space a complex objective datum 
derived from this complex structure; (iii) under normal 'responsive' treat- 
ment, devoid of originality, the complex detail reduced to physical sim- 
plicity by negative prehensions; (iv) this detail preserved for positive feel- 
ing by the emotional and purposive readjustments produced by originality 
of conceptual feeling (appetition); (v) the physical distortion of the field, 
leading to instability of [163] the structure; (vi) the structure accepting 
repair by food from the environment. 

SECTION XI 

The complexity of nature is inexhaustible. So far we have argued that the 
nature of life is not to be sought by its identification with some society of 



The Order of Nature 107 

occasions, which are living in virtue of the defining characteristic of that 
society. An 'entirely living' nexus is 7 in respect to its life, not social. Each 
member of the nexus derives the necessities of its being from its prehen- 
sions of its complex social environment; by itself the nexus lacks the genetic 
power which belongs to 'societies/ But a living nexus, though non-social in 
virtue of its life/ may support a thread of personal order along some his- 
torical route of its members. Such an enduring entity is a living person/ 
It is not of the essence of life to be a living person. Indeed a living person 
requires that its immediate environment be a living, non-social nexus. 

The defining characteristic of a living person is some definite type of 
hybrid prehensions transmitted from occasion to occasion of its existence. 
The term 'hybrid' is defined more particularly in Part III. It is sufficient 
to state here that a 'hybrid' prehension is the prehension by one subject of 
a conceptual prehension, or of an 'impure' prehension, belonging to the 
mentality of another subject. By this transmission the mental originality 
of the living occasions receives a character and a depth. In this way origi- 
nality is both 'canalized'— to use Bergson's word— and intensified. Its range 
is widened within limits. Apart from canalization, depth of originality 
would spell disaster for the animal body. With it, personal mentality can 
be evolved, so as to combine its individual originality with the safety of the 
material organism on which it depends. Thus life turns back into society: it 
binds originality within bounds, and gains the massiveness due to reiterated 
character. 

In the case of single cells, of vegetation, and of the [164] lower forms of 
animal life, we have no ground for conjecturing living personality. But in 
the case of the higher animals there is central direction, which suggests 
that in their case each animal body harbours a living person, or living per- 
sons. Our own self-consciousness is direct awareness of ourselves as such 
persons. 17 There are limits to such unified control, which indicate dis- 
sociation of personality, multiple personalities in successive alternations, 
and even multiple personalities in joint possession. This last case belongs 
to the pathology of religion, and in primitive times has been interpreted as 
demoniac possession. Thus, though life in its essence is the gain of inten- 
sity through freedom, yet it can also submit to canalization and so gain the 
massiveness of order. But it is not necessary merely to presuppose the 
drastic case of personal order. We may conjecture, though without much 
evidence, that even in the lowest form of life the entirely living nexus is 
canalized into some faint form of mutual conformity. Such conformity 
amounts to social order depending on hybrid prehensions of originalities in 
the mental poles of the antecedent members of the nexus. The survival 
power, arising from adaptation and regeneration, is thus explained. Thus 
life is a passage from physical order to pure mental originality, and from 

17 This account of a living personality requires completion by reference to its 
objectification in the consequent nature of God. Cf. Part V, Ch. II. 



108 Discussions and Applications 

pure mental originality to canalized mental originality. It must also be 
noted that the pure mental originality works by the canalization of rele- 
vance arising from the primordial nature of God. Thus an originality in the 
temporal world is conditioned, though not determined, by an initial sub- 
jective aim supplied by the ground of all order and of all originality. 

Finally, we have to consider the type of structured + society which gives 
rise to the traditional body-mind problem. For example, human men- 
tality is partly the outcome of the human body, partly the single directive 
[165] agency of the body, partly a system of cogitations which have a cer- 
tain irrelevance to the physical relationships of the body. The Cartesian 
philosophy is based upon the seeming fact— the plain fact— of one body 
and one mind, which are two substances in causaU association. For the 
philosophy of organism the problem is transformed. 

Each actuality is essentially bipolar, physical and mental, and the physi- 
cal inheritance is essentially accompanied by a conceptual reaction partly 
conformed to it, and partly introductory of a+ relevant novel contrast, but 
always introducing emphasis, valuation, and purpose. The integration of 
the physical and mental side into a unity of experience is a self-formation 
which is a process of concrescence, and which by the principle of objective 
immortality characterizes the creativity which transcends it. So though 
mentality is non-spatial, mentality is always a reaction from, and integra- 
tion with, physical experience which is spatial. It is obvious that we must 
not demand another mentality presiding over these other actualities (a 
kind of Uncle Sam, over and above all the U.S. citizens). All the life in 
the body is the life of the individual cells. There are thus millions upon 
millions of centres of life in each animal body. So what needs to be ex- 
plained is not dissociation of personality but unifying control, by reason 
of which we not only have unified behaviour, which can be observed by 
others, but also consciousness of a unified experience. 

A good many actions do not seem to be due to the unifying control, e.g., 
with proper stimulants a heart can be made to go on beating after it has 
been taken out of the body. There are centres of reaction and control which 
cannot be identified with the centre of experience. This is still more so with 
insects. For example, worms and jellyfish seem to be merely harmonized 
cells, very little centralized; when cut in two, their parts go on performing 
their functions independently. Through a series of animals we can trace a 
progressive rise into a [166] centrality of control. Insects have some cen- 
tral control; even in man, many of the body's actions are done with some 
independence, but with an organ of central control of very high-grade char- 
acter in the brain. 

The state of things, according to the philosophy of organism, is very dif- 
ferent from the Scholastic view of St. Thomas Aquinas, of the mind as in- 
forming the body. The living body is a coordination of high-grade actual 
occasions; but in a living body of a low type the occasions are much nearer 
to a democracy. In a living body of a high type there are grades of occa- 



The Order of Nature 109 

sions so coordinated by their paths of inheritance through the body, that 
a peculiar richness of inheritance is enjoyed by various occasions in some 
parts of the body. Finally, the brain is coordinated so that a peculiar rich- 
ness of inheritance is enjoyed now by this and now by that part; and thus 
there is produced the presiding personality at that moment in the body. 
Owing to the delicate organization of the body, there is a returned influ- 
ence, an inheritance of character derived from the presiding occasion and 
modifying the subsequent occasions through the rest of the body. 

We must remember the extreme generality of the notion of an enduring 
object— a genetic character inherited through a historic route of actual 
occasions. Some kinds of enduring objects form material bodies, others do 
not. But just as the difference between living and non-living occasions is 
not sharp, but more or less, so the distinction between an enduring object 
which is an atomic material body and one which is nott is again more or 
less. Thus the question as to whether to call an enduring object a transition 
of matter or of character is very much a verbal question as to where you 
draw the line between the various properties (cf. the way in which the 
distinction between matter and radiant energy has now vanished). 

Thus in an animal body the presiding occasion, if there be one, is the 
final node, or intersection, of a complex [167} structure of many enduring 
objects. Such a structure pervades the human body. The harmonized rela- 
tions of the parts of the body constitute this wealth of inheritance into a 
harmony of contrasts, issuing into intensity of experience. The inhibitions 
of opposites have been adjusted into the contrasts of opposites. The human 
mind is thus conscious of its bodilyt inheritance. There is also an enduring 
object formed by the inheritance from presiding occasion to presiding oc- 
casion. This endurance of the mind is only one more example of the gen- 
eral principle on which the body is constructed. This route of presiding 
occasions probably wanders from part to part of the brain, dissociated from 
the physical material atoms. But central personal dominance is only partial, 
and in pathological cases is apt to vanish. 



CHAPTER IV 
ORGANISMS AND ENVIRONMENT 

SECTION I 

[168] So far the discussion has chiefly concentrated upon the discrimina- 
tion of the modes of functioning which in germ, or in mere capacity, are 
represented in the constitution of each actual entity. The presumption 
that there is only one genus of actual entities constitutes an ideal of cos- 
mological theory to which the philosophy of organism endeavours to don- 
form. The description of the generic character of an actual entity should 
include God, as well as the lowliest actual occasion, though there is a spe- 
cific difference between the nature of God and that of any occasion. 

Also the differences between actual occasions, arising from the charac- 
ters of their data, and from the narrowness and widths of their feelings, 
and from the comparative importance of various stages, enable a classifica- 
tion to be made whereby these occasions are gathered into various types. 
From the metaphysical standpoint these types are not to be sharply dis- 
criminated; as a matter of empirical observation, the occasions do seem to 
fall into fairly distinct classes. 

The character of an actual entity is finally governed by its datum; what- 
ever be the freedom of feeling arising in the concrescence, there can be no 
transgression of the limitations of capacity inherent in the datum. The 
datum both limits and supplies. It follows from this doctrine that the 
character of an organism depends on that of its environment. But the 
character of an environment is the sum of the characters of the various 
societies of actual entities which jointly constitute that envi- [J 69] ron- 
ment; although it is pure assumption that every environment is com- 
pletely overrun by societies of entities. Spread through the environment 
there may be many entities which cannot be assigned to any society of 
entities. The societies in an environment will constitute its orderly ele- 
ment, and the non-social actual entities will constitute its element of 
chaos. There is no reason, so far as our knowledge is concerned, to con- 
ceive the actual world as purely orderly, or as purely chaotic. 

Apart from the reiteration gained from its societies, an environment 
does not provide the massiveness of emphasis capable of dismissing its 
contrary elements into negative prehensions. Any ideal of depth of satis- 
faction, arising from the combination of narrowness and width, can only 
be achieved through adequate order. In proportion to the chaos there is 
triviality. There are different types of order; and it is not true that in pro- 



Organisms and Environment 111 

portion to the orderliness there is depth. There are various types of order, 
and some of them provide more trivial satisfaction than do others. Thus, 
if there is to be progress beyond limited ideals, the course of history by 
way of escape must venture along the borders of chaos in its substitution 
of higher for lower types of order. 

The immanence of God gives reason for the belief that pure chaos is 
intrinsically impossible. At the other end of the scale, the immensity of 
the world negatives the belief that any state of order can be so established 
that beyond it there can be no progress. This belief in a final order, popu- 
lar in religious and philosophic thought, seems to be due to the prevalent 
fallacy that all types of seriality necessarily involve terminal instances. 
It follows that Tennyson's phrase, 

. . . onef far-off divine event 

To which the whole creation moves, 

presents a fallacious conception of the universe. 

An actual entity must be classified in respect to its [170] 'satisfaction/ 
and this arises out of its datum by the operations constituting its 'process/ 
Satisfactions can be classified by reference to 'triviality/ Vagueness/ 'nar- 
rowness/ 'width.' Triviality and vagueness are characteristics in the satis- 
faction which have their origins respectively in opposed characteristics in 
the datum. Triviality arises from lack of coordination in the factors of the 
datum, so that no feeling arising from one factor is reinforced by any 
feeling arising from another factor. In other words, the specific constitu- 
tion of the actual entity in question is not such as to elicit depth of feel- 
ing from contrasts thus presented. Incompatibility has predominated over 
contrast. Then the process can involve no coordinating intensification 
either from a reinforced narrowness, or from enhancement of relevance 
due to the higher contrasts derived from harmonized width. Triviality is 
due to the wrong sort of width; that is to say, it is due to width without 
any reinforced narrowness in its higher categories. Harmony is this com- 
bination of width and narrowness. Some narrow concentration on a 
limited set of effects is essential for depth; but the difference arises in the 
levels of the categories of contrast involved. A high category involves un- 
plumbed potentiality for the realization of depth in its lower components. 
Thus 'triviality' arises from excess of incompatible differentiation. 

On the other hand, 'vagueness' is due to excess of identification. In the 
datum the objectifications of various actual entities are replicas with faint 
coordinations of perspective contrast. Under these conditions the con- 
trasts between the various objectifications are faint, and there is deficiency 
in supplementary feeling discriminating the objects from each other. 
There can thus be intensive narrowness in the prehension of the whole 
nexus, by reason of the common character,! combined with vagueness, 
which is the irrelevance of the differences between the definite actual en- 
tities of the nexus. The objectified entities reinforce each other by their 



112 Discussions and Applications 

likeness. But there [171] is lack of differentiation among the component 
objectifications owing to the deficiency in relevant contrasts. 

In this way a group of actual entities contributes to the satisfaction as 
one extensive whole. It is divisible, but the actual divisions, and their 
sporadic differences of character, have sunk into comparative irrelevance 
beside the one character belonging to the whole and any of its parts. 

By reason of vagueness, many count as one, and are subject to indefi- 
nite possibilities of division into such multifold unities. When there is 
such vague prehension, the differences between the actual entities so pre- 
hended are faint chaotic factors in the environment, and have thereby 
been relegated to irrelevance. Thus vagueness is an essential condition for 
the narrowness which is one condition for depth of relevance. It enables a 
background to contribute its relevant quota, and it enables a social group 
in the foreground to gain concentrated relevance for its community of 
character. The right chaos, and the right vagueness, are jointly required 
for any effective harmony. They produce the massive simplicity which has 
been expressed by the term 'narrowness/ Thus chaos is not to be identified 
with evil; for harmony requires the due coordination of chaos, vagueness, 
narrowness, and width. 

According to this account, the background in which the environment is 
set must be discriminated into two layers. There is first the relevant back- 
ground, providing a massive systematic uniformity. This background is 
the presupposed world to which all ordinary propositions refer. Secondly, 
there is the more remote chaotic background which has merely an irrelevant 
triviality, so far as concerns direct objectification in the actual entity in 
question. This background represents those entities in the actual world 
with such perspective remoteness that there is even a chaos of diverse 
cosmic epochs. In the background there is triviality, vagueness, and mas- 
sive uniformity; in the foreground discrimination and [172] contrasts, but 
always negative prehensions of irrelevant diversities. 

SECTION II 

Intensity is the reward of narrowness. The domination of the environ- 
ment by a few social groups is the factor producing both the vagueness of 
discrimination between actual entities and the intensification of relevance 
of common characteristics. These are the two requisites for narrowness. 
The lower organisms have low-grade types of narrowness; the higher or- 
ganisms have intensified contrasts in the higher categories. In describing 
the capacities, realized or unrealized, of an actual occasion, we have, with 
Locke, tacitly taken human experience as an example upon which to 
found the generalized description required for metaphysics. But when we 
turn to the lower organisms we have first to determine which among such 
capacities fade from realization into irrelevance, that is to say, by com- 
parison with human experience which is our standard. 



Organisms and Environment 113 

In any metaphysical scheme founded upon the Kantian or Hegelian 
traditions, experience is the product of operations which lie among the 
higher of the human modes of functioning. For such schemes, ordered ex- 
perience is the result of schematization of modes of thought, concerning 
causation, substance, quality, quantity. 

The process by which experiential unity is attained f is thereby con- 
ceived in the guise of modes of thought. The exception is to be found in 
Kant's preliminary sections on 'Transcendental Aesthetic/ by which he 
provides space and time. But Kant, following Hume, assumes the radical 
disconnection of impressions qua data; and therefore conceives his tran- 
scendental aesthetic* to be the mere description of a subjective process 
appropriating the data by orderliness of feeling. 

The philosophy of organism aspires to construct a critique of pure 
feeling, in the philosophical position in [173] which Kant put his Critique 
of Pure Reason. This should also supersede the remaining Critiques re- 
quired in the Kantian philosophy. Thus in the organic philosophy Kant's 
'Transcendental Aesthetic' becomes a distorted fragment of what should 
have been his main topic. The datum includes its own interconnections, 
and the first stage of the process of feeling is the reception into the 
^responsive conformity of feeling whereby the datum, which is mere po- 
tentiality, becomes the individualized basis for a complex unity of 
realization. 

This conception, as found in the philosophy of organism, is practically 
identical with Locke's ways of thought in the latter half of his Essay. He 
speaks of the ideas in the perceived objects, and tacitly presupposes their 
identification with corresponding ideas in the perceiving mind. The ideas in 
the objects have been appropriated by the subjective functioning of the 
perceiving mind. This mode of phraseology can be construed as a casual 
carelessness of speech on the part of Locke, or a philosophic inconsistency. 
But apart from this inconsistency Locke's philosophy falls to pieces; as in 
fact was its fate in the hands of Hume. 

There is, however, a fundamental misconception to be found in Locke, 
and in prevalent doctrines of perception. It concerns the answer to the 
question t as to the description of the primitive types of experience. Locke 
assumes that the utmost primitiveness is to be found in sense-perception. 
The seventeenth-century physics, with the complexities of primary and 
secondary qualities, should have warned philosophers that sense-percep- 
tion was involved in complex modes of functioning. Primitive feeling is to 
be found at a lower level. The mistake was natural for mediaeval and Greek 
philosophers: for they had not modern physics before them as a plain 
warning. In sense-perception we have passed the Rubicon, dividing direct 
perception from the higher forms of mentality, which play with error and 
thus found intellectual empires. 

[174] The more primitive types of experience are concerned with sense- 
reception, and not with sense-perception. This statement will require some 



114 Discussions and Applications 

prolonged explanation. But the course of thought can be indicated by 
adopting Bergson's admirable phraseology, sense-reception is 'unspatial- 
ized/ and sense-perception is 'spatialized/ In sense-reception the sensa are 
the definiteness of emotion: they are emotional forms transmitted from 
occasion to occasion. Finally in some occasion of adequate complexity, the 
Category of Transmutation endows them with the new function of charac- 
terizing nexus. 



SECTION HI 

In the first place, those eternal objects which will be classified under the 
name 'sensa' constitute the lowest category of eternal objects. Such eternal 
objects do not express a manner of relatedness between other eternal ob- 
jects. They are not contrasts, or patterns. Sensa are necessary as com- 
ponents in any actual entity, relevant in the realization of the higher 
grades. But a sensum does not, for its own realization, require any eternal 
object of a lower grade, though it does involve the potentiality of pattern 
and does gain access of intensity from some realization of status in some 
realized pattern. Thus a sensum requires, as a rescue from its shallowness 
of zero width, some selective relevance of wider complex eternal objects 
which include it as a component; but it does not involve the relevance of 
any eternal objects which it presupposes. Thus, in one sense, a sensum is 
simple; for its realization does not involve the concurrent realization of 
certain definite eternal objects, which are its definite simple components. 
But, in another sense, each sensum is complex; for it cannot be dissociated 
from its potentiality for ingression into any actual entity, and fromf its 
potentiality of contrasts and of patterned relationships with other eternal 
objects. Thus each sensum shares the characteristic common to all eternal 
objects, that it introduces the notion of the logi- [175] cal variable, in both 
forms, the unselective 'any' and the selective 'some/ 

It is possible that this definition of 'sensa' excludes some cases of con- 
trast which are ordinarily termed 'sensa' and that it includes some emo- 
tional qualities which are ordinarily excluded. Its convenience consists in 
the fact that it is founded on a metaphysical principle, and not on an 
empirical investigation of the physiology of the human body. 

Narrowness in the lowest category achieves such intensity as belongs to 
such experience, but fails by reason of deficiency of width. Contrast elicits 
depth, and only shallow experience is possible when there is a lack of pat- 
terned contrast. Hume notices the comparative failure of the higher fa- 
culty of imagination in respect to mere sensa. He exaggerates this com- 
parative failure into a dogma of absolute inhibition to imagine a novel 
sensum; whereas the evidence which he himself adduces, of the imagina- 
tion of a new shade of colour to fill a gap in a graduated scale of shades, 
shows t that a contrast between given shades can be imaginatively extended 
so as to generate the imagination of the missing shade. But Hume's ex- 



Organisms and Environment 115 

ample also shows that imagination finds its easiest freedom among the 
higher categories of eternal objects, 

A pattern is in a sense simple: a pattern is the 'manner' of a complex 
contrast abstracted from the specific eternal objects which constitute the 
'matter' of the contrast. But the pattern refers unselectively to any eternal 
objects with the potentiality of being elements in the 'matter' of some 
contrast in that 'manner/ 

A pattern and a sensum are thus both simple in the sense that neither 
involves other specified eternal objects in its own realization. The manner 
of a pattern is the individual essence of the pattern. But no individual 
essence is realizable apart from some of its potentialities of relationship, 
that is, apart from its relational essence. But a pattern lacks simplicity in 
another sense, in which \176] a sensum retains simplicity. The realization 
of a pattern necessarily involves the concurrent realization of a group of 
eternal objects capable of contrast in that pattern. The realization of the 
pattern is through the realization of this contrast. The realization might 
have occurred by means of another contrast in the same pattern; but 
some complex contrast in that pattern is required. But the realization of a 
sensum in its ideal shallowness of intensity, with zero width, does not 
require any other eternal object, other than its intrinsic apparatus of indi- 
vidual and relational essence; it can remain just itself, with its unrealized 
potentialities for patterned contrasts. An actual entity with this absolute 
narrowness has an ideal faintness of satisfaction, differing from the ideal 
zero of chaos, but equally impossible. For realization means ingression in 
an actual entity, and this involves the synthesis of all ingredients with data 
derived from a complex universe. Realization is ideally distinguishable 
from the ingression of contrasts, but not in fact. 

The simplest grade of actual occasions must be conceived as experienc- 
ing a few sensa, with the minimum of patterned contrast. The sensa are 
then experienced emotionally, and constitute the specific feelings whose 
intensities sum up into the unity of satisfaction. In such occasions the proc- 
ess is deficient in its highest phases; the process is the slave to the datum. 
There is the individualizing phase of conformal feeling, but the originative 
phases of supplementary and conceptual feelings f are negligible. 

SECTION IV 

According to this account, the experience of the simplest grade of ac- 
tual entity is to be conceived as the unoriginative response to the datum 
with its simple content of sensa. The datum is simple, because it presents 
the objectified experiences of the past under the guise of simplicity. Occa- 
sions A, B, and C enter into the experience of occasion M as themselves 
experiencing [177] sensa Si and s 2 unified by some faint contrast between 
s x and s 2 . Occasion JVf responsively feels sensa $1 and s 2 as its own sensa- 
tions. There is thus a transmission of sensation emotion from A, B, and C 
to M. If M had the wit of self-analysis, M would know that it felt its own 



116 Discussions and Applications 

sensa, by reason of a transfer from A, B, and C to itself. Thus the (un- 
conscious) direct perception of A, B, and C is merely the causal efficacy 
of A, B, and C as elements in the constitution of M. Such direct percep- 
tion will suffer from vagueness; for if A, B, and C tell the same tale with 
minor variation of intensity, the discrimination of A, and B, and C from 
each other will be irrelevant. There may thus remain a sense of the causal 
efficacy of actual presences, whose exact relationships in the external world 
are shrouded. Thus the experience of M is to be conceived as a quantitative 
emotion arising from the contribution of sensa from A, B, C and propor- 
tionately conformed to by M. 

Generalizing from the language of physics, the experience of M is an 
intensity arising out of specific sensa, directed from A, B, C. There is in 
fact a directed influx from A, B, C of quantitative feeling, arising from 
specific forms of feeling. The experience has a vector character, a common 
measure of intensity, and specific forms of feelings conveying that inten- 
sity. If we substitute the term 'energy' for the concept of a quantitative 
emotional intensity, and the term 'form of energy 7 for the concept of 
'specific form of feeling/ and remember that in physics Vector' means defi- 
nite transmission from elsewhere, we see that this metaphysical description 
of the simplest elements in the constitution of actual entities agrees ab- 
solutely with the general principles according to which the notions of 
modern physics are framed. The 'datum/ in metaphysics is the basis of the 
vector-theory in physics; the quantitative satisfaction in metaphysics is 
the basis of the scalar localization of energy in physics; the 'sensa' in 
metaphysics are the basis of the diversity of specific forms under which 
energy clothes itself. Sci- [178] entific descriptions are, of course, entwined 
with the specific details of geometry and physical laws, which arise from 
the special order of the cosmic epoch in which we find ourselves. But the 
general principles of physics are exactly what we should expect as a spe- 
cific exemplification of the metaphysics required by the philosophy of 
organism. It has been a defect in the modern philosophies that they throw 
no light whatever on any scientific principles. Science should investigate 
particular species, and metaphysics should investigate the generic notions 
under which those specific principles should fall. Yet, modern realisms 
have had nothing to say about scientific principles; and modern idealisms 
have merely contributed the unhelpful suggestion that the phenomenal 
world is one of the inferior avocations of the Absolute. 

The direct perception whereby the datum in the immediate subject is 
inherited from the past can thus, under an abstraction, be conceived as the 
transference of throbs of emotional energy, clothed in the specific forms 
provided by sensa. Since the vagueness in the experientf subject will veil 
the separate objeetifi cations wherein there are individual contributions 
to the total satisfaction, the emotional energy in the final satisfaction wears 
the aspect of a total intensity capable of all gradations of ideal variation. 
But in its origin it represents the totality arising from the contributions of 



Organisms and Environment 117 

separate objects to that form of energy. Thus, having regard to its origin, 
a real atomic structure of each form of energy is discernible, so much from 
each objectified actual occasion; and only a finite number of actual occa- 
sions will be relevant. 

This direct perception, characterized by mere subjective responsiveness 
and by lack of origination in the higher phases, exhibits the constitution 
of an actual entity under the guise of receptivity. In the language of causa- 
tion, it describes the efficient causation operative in the actual world. In 
the language of epistemology, as framed by Locke, it describes how the 
ideas of particular [179] existents are absorbed into the subjectivity of the 
percipient and are the datum for its experience of the external world. In 
the language of science, it describes how the quantitative intensity of lo- 
calized energy bears in itself the vector marks of its origin, and the spe- 
cialities of its specific forms; it also gives a reason for the atomic quanta 
to be discerned in the building up of a quantity of energy. In this way, 
the philosophy of organism— as it should— appeals to the facts. 

SECTION V 

The current accounts of perception are the stronghold of modern meta- 
physical difficulties. They have their origin in the same misunderstanding 
which led to the incubus of the substance-quality categories. The Greeks 
looked at a stone, and perceived that it was grey. The Greeks were ig- 
norant of modern physics; but modern philosophers discuss perception in 
terms of categories derived from the Greeks. 

The Greeks started from perception in its most elaborate and sophisti- 
cated form, namely, visual perception. In visual perception, crude per- 
ception is most completely made over by the originative phases in ex- 
perience, phases which are especially prominent in human experience. If 
we wish to disentangle the two earlier prehensive phases— the receptive 
phases, namely, the datum and the subjective response— from the more 
advanced originative phases, we must consider what is common to all 
modes of perception, amid the bewildering variety of originative 
amplification. 

On this topic I am content to appeal to Hume. He writes: "But my 
senses convey to me only the impressions of coloured points, disposed in a 
certain manner. If the eye is sensible of any thingt further, I desire it may 
be pointed out to me/' 1 And again: "It is universally allowed by the 
writers on optics, that the eye at all times sees an equal number of physical 
points, and that a man [180] on the top of a mountain has no larger an 
image presented to his senses, than when he is cooped up in the narrow- 
est court or chamber." 2 

In each of these quotations Hume explicitly asserts that the eye sees. 

1 Treatise, Bk. U Part II, Sect. III. Italics not his. 

2 Treatise, Bk. I, Part III, Sect. IX.* 



118 Discussions and Applications 

The conventional comment on such a passage is that Hume, for the sake 
of intelligibility, is using common forms of expression; that he is only 
really speaking of impressions on the mind; and that in the dim future, 
some learned scholar will gain reputation by emending 'eye' into 'ego/ 
The reason for citing the passages is to enforce the thesis that the form 
of speech is literary and intelligible because it expresses the ultimate truth 
of animal perception. The ultimate momentary 'ego' has as its datum the 
'eye as experiencing such-and-such f sights/ In the second quotation, the 
reference to the number of physical points is a reference to the excited 
area on the retina. Thus the 'eye as experiencing such-and-such sights' is 
passed on as a datum 7 from the cells of the retina, throughf the train of 
actual entities forming the relevant nerves, up to the brain. Any direct 
relation of eye to brain is entirely overshadowed by this intensity of in- 
direct transmission. Of course this statement is merely a pale abstraction 
from the physiological theory of vision. But the physiological account 
does not pretend to be anything more than indirect inductive knowledge. 
The point here to be noticed is the immediate literary obviousness of 'the 
eye as experiencing such-and-such sights/ This is the very reason why 
Hume uses the expression in spite of his own philosophy. The conclusion, 
which the philosophy of organism draws, is that in human experience the 
fundamental fact of perception is the inclusion, in the datum, of the ob- 
jectification of an antecedent part of the human body with such-and-such 
experiences. Hume agrees with this conclusion f sufficiently well so as to 
argue from it, when it suits his purpose. He writes: 

I would fain ask those philosophers, who found so much of their 
reasonings on the distinction [J 81] of substance and accident, and 
imagine we have clear ideas of each, whether the idea of substance be 
derived from the impressions of sensation or reflection? If it be con- 
veyed to usf by our senses, I ask, which of them, and after what man- 
ner? If it be perceived by the eyes, it must be a colour; if by the ears, a 
sound; if by the palate, a taste; and so of the other senses. 3 
We can prolong Hume's list: the feeling of the stone is in the hand; the 
feeling of the food is the ache in the stomach; the compassionate yearning 
is in the bowels, according to biblical writers; the feeling of well-being is in 
the viscera passim; ill temper is the emotional tone derivative from the 
disordered liver. 

In this list, Hume's and its prolongation, for some cases—as in sight, 
for example— the supplementary phase in the ultimate subject overbal- 
ances in importance the datum inherited from the eye. In other cases, as 
in touch, the datum of 'the feeling in the hand' maintains its importance, 
however much the intensity, or even the character, of the feeling may be 
due to supplementation in the ultimate subject: this instance should be 
contrasted with that of sight. In the instance of the ache the stomach, as 

3 Treatise, Bk. I, Part I, Sect. VI. 



Organisms and Environment 119 

datum, is of chief importance, and the food though obscurely felt is 
secondary— at least, until the intellectual analysis of the situation due to 
the doctor, professional or amateur. In the instances of compassion, well- 
being, and ill temper, the supplementary feelings in the ultimate subject 
predominate, though there are obscure references to the bodily organs as 
inherited data. 

This survey supports the view that the predominant basis of perception 
is perception of the various bodily organs, as passing on their experiences 
by channels of transmission and of enhancement. It is the accepted doc- 
trine in physical science that a living body is to be interpreted according 
to what is known of other sections of the physical universe. This is a sound 
axiom; but it [182] is double-edged. For it carries with it the converse de- 
duction that other sections of the universe are to be interpreted in ac- 
cordance with what we know of the human body. 

It is also a sound rule that all interpretation should be based upon a 
vera causa. Now the original reliance upon 'the grey stone 7 has been 
shown by modern physics to be due to a misapprehension of a complex 
situation; but we have direct knowledge of the relationship of our central 
intelligence to our bodily feelings. According to this interpretation, the 
human body is to be conceived as a complex 'amplifier'— to use the lan- 
guage of the technology of electromagnetism. The various actual entities, 
which compose the body, are so coordinated that the experiences of any 
part of the body are transmitted to one or more central occasions to be 
inherited with enhancements accruing upon the way, or finally added by 
reason of the final integration. The enduring personality is the historic 
route of living occasions which are severally dominant in the body at suc- 
cessive instants. The human body is thus achieving on a scale of concen- 
trated efficiency a type of social organization, which with every gradation 
of efficiency constitutes the orderliness whereby a cosmic epoch shelters in 
itself intensity of satisfaction. 

The crude aboriginal character of direct perception is inheritance. What 
is inherited is feeling-tone with evidence of its origin: in other words, vector 
feeling-tone. In the higher grades of perception vague feeling-tone dif- 
ferentiates itself into various types of sensa— those of touch, sight, smell, 
etc.— each transmuted into a definite prehension of tonal contemporary 
nexus f by the final percipient. 

SECTION VI 

In principle, the animal body is only the more highly organized and 
immediate part of the general environment for its dominant actual occa- 
sion, which is the ultimate [183] percipient. But the transition from with- 
out to within the body marks the passage from lower to higher grades of 
actual occasions. The higher the grade, the more vigorous and the more 
original is the enhancement from the supplementary phase. Pure recep- 



120 Discussions and Applications 

tivity and transmission givef place to the trigger-action of life whereby 
there is release of energy in novel forms. Thus the transmitted datum ac- 
quires sensa enhanced in relevance or even changed in character by the 
passage from the low-grade external world into the intimacy of the human 
body. The datum transmitted from the stone becomes the touch-feeling 
in the hand, but it preserves the vector characterf of its origin from the 
stone. The touch-feeling in the hand with this vector origin from the stone 
is transmitted to the percipient in the brain. Thus the final perception is 
the perception of the stone through the touch in the hand. In this per- 
ception the stone is vague and faintly relevant in comparison with the 
hand. But, however dim, it is there. 

In the transmission of inheritance from A to B, to C, to D, A is ob- 
jectified by the eternal object S as a datum for B; where S is a sensum or a 
complex pattern of sensa. Then B is objectified for C. But the datum for 
B is thereby capable of some relevance for C, namely, A as objectified for 
B becomes reobjectified for C; and so on to D 7 and throughout the line of 
objectifications. Then for the ultimate subject M the datum includes A as 
thus transmitted, B as thus transmitted, and so on. The final objectifica- 
tions for M are effected by a set S 3 f of eternal objects which is a modifica- 
tion of the original group S. The modification consists partly in relegation 
of elements into comparative irrelevance, partly in enhancement of rele- 
vance for other elements, partly in supplementation by eliciting into 
important relevance some eternal objects not in the original S. Generally 
there will be vagueness in the distinction between A, and B, and C, and 
D, etc., in their function as components in the datum for M. Some of the 
line, A and C for instance, may stand out \184] with distinctness by rea- 
son of some peculiar feat of original supplementation which retains its 
undimmed importance in subsequent transmission. Other members of the 
chain may sink into oblivion. For example, in touch there is a reference to 
the stone in contact with the hand, and a reference to the hand; but in 
normal, healthy, bodily operations the chain of occasions along the arm 
sinks into the background, almost into complete oblivion. Thus M, which 
has some analytic consciousness of its datum, is conscious of the feeling in 
its hand as the hand touches the stone. According to this account, per- 
ception in its primary form is consciousness of the causal efficacy of the 
external world by reason of which the percipient is a concrescence from a 
definitely constituted datum. The vector character of the datum is this 
causal efficacy. 

Thus perception, in this primary sense, is perception of the settled 
world in the past as constituted by its feeling-tones, and as efficacious by 
reason of those feeling-tones. Perception, in this sense of the term, will be 
called 'perception in the mode of causal efficacy/ Memory is an example 
of perception in this mode. For memory is perception relating to the data 
from some historic route of ultimate percipient subjects Mi, M 2 , M 3 , 
etc., leading up to M which is the memorizing percipient. 



Organisms and Environment 121 



SECTION VII 

It is evident that 'perception in the mode of causal efficacy' is not that 
sort of perception which has received chief attention in the philosophical 
tradition. Philosophers have disdained the information about the universe 
obtained through their visceral feelings, and have concentrated on visual 
feelings. 

What we ordinarily term our visual perceptions are the result of the 
later stages in the concrescence of the percipient occasion. When we 
register in consciousness our visual perception of a grey stone, something 
more than bare sight is meant. The 'stone' has a reference [185] to its 
past, when it could have been used as a+ missile if small enough, or as a seat 
if large enough. A 'stone' has certainly a history, and probably a future. It is 
one of the elements in the actual world which has got to be referred to 
as an actual reason and not as an abstract potentiality. But we all know 
that the mere sight involved, in the perception of the grey stone, is the 
sight of a grey shape contemporaneous with the percipient, and with 
certain spatial relations to the percipient, more or less vaguely defined. 
Thus the mere sight is confined to the illustration of the geometrical 
perspective relatedness, of a certain contemporary spatial region, to the 
percipient, the illustration being effected by the mediation of 'grey/ The 
sensum 'grey' rescues that region from its vague confusion with other 
regions. 

Perception which merely, by means of a sensum, rescues from vagueness 
a contemporary spatial region, in respect to its spatial shape and its spatial 
perspective from the percipient, will be called 'perception in the mode of 
presentational immediacy.' 

Perception in this mode has already been considered in Part II, Chapter 
II. A more elaborate discussion of it can now be undertaken. 4 The defini- 
tion, which has just been given, extends beyond the particular case of 
sight. The unravelling of the complex interplay between the two modes of 
perception— causal efficacy and presentational immediacy— t is one main 
problem of the theory of perception. 5 The ordinary philosophical discus- 
sion of perception is almost wholly concerned with this interplay, and 
ignores the two pure modes which are essential for its proper explanation. 
The interplay between the two modes will be termed 'symbolic reference.' 

[186] Such symbolic reference is so habitual in human experience that 
great care is required to distinguish the two modes. In order to find ob- 

4 Also cf.f subsequent discussions in Parts III and IV. 

5 Cf. my Barbour-Page lectures, Symbolism, Its Meaning and Effect, delivered 
at the University of Virginia, April, 1927 (New York: Macrnillan, 1927; Cam- 
bridge University Press, 1928).+ Another discussion of this question is there 
undertaken, with other illustrations, Cf. also Professor Norman Kemp Smith's 
Prolegomena to an Idealist Theory of Knowledge, Macrnillan, 1924. 



122 Discussions and Applications 

vious examples of the pure mode of causal efficacy we must have recourse 
to the viscera and to memory; and to find examples of the pure mode of 
presentational immediacy we must have recourse to so-called 'delusive' 
perceptions. For example, the image of a grey stone as seen in a mirror 
illustrates the space behind the mirror; the visual delusions arising from 
some delirium, or some imaginative excitement, illustrate surrounding 
spatial regions; analogously for the double-vision due to maladjustment of 
the eyes; the sight at night, of the stars and nebulae and Milky Way, 
illustrates vague regions of the contemporary sky; the feelings in ampu- 
tated limbs illustrate spaces beyond the actual body; a bodily pain, re- 
ferred to some part not the cause of the disorder, illustrates the painful 
region though not the pain -giving region. All these are perfectly good ex- 
amples of the pure mode of presentational immediacy. 

The epithet 'delusive/ which fits many, if not all, of these examples of 
presentational immediacy, is evidence that the mediating eternal object is 
not to be ascribed to the donation of the perceived region. It must have 
acquired its ingression in this mode from one of the originative phases of 
the percipient occasion. To this extent, the philosophy of organism is in 
agreement with the seventeenth-century doctrine of primary and second- 
ary qualities, the mediating eternal object being, in this mode of ingres- 
sion, a secondary quality. But in the philosophy of organism the doctrine 
does not have the consequences which follow in the earlier philosophies. 

The account of perception in the pure mode of presentational imme- 
diacy, which has just been given, agrees absolutely with Descartes' doctrine 
of perception in general, so far as can be judged from his arguments which 
presuppose perception, and putting aside a few detached [J 87] passages 
wherein he comes near to the doctrine of 'objectification' and near to 
Locke's second doctrine of 'ideas determined to particular existents.' Any- 
how, his conclusion immediately follows that, in perception, thus de- 
scribed, all that is perceived is that the object has extension and is 
implicated in a complex of extensive relatedness with the animal body 
of the percipient. Part of the difficulties of Cartesian philosophy, and 
of any philosophy which accepts this account as a complete account 
of perception, is to explain how we know more than this meagre fact 
about the world although our only avenue of direct knowledge limits 
us to this barren residium. Also, if this be all that we perceive about 
the physical world, we have no basis for ascribing the origination of 
the mediating sensa to any functioning of the human body. We are thus 
driven to the Cartesian duality of substances, bodies and minds. Percep- 
tion is to be ascribed to mental functioning in respect to the barren ex- 
tensive universe. We have already done violence to our immediate con- 
viction by thus thrusting the human body out of the story; for, as Hume 
himself declares, we know that we see by our eyes, and taste by our palates. 
But when we have gone so far, it is inevitable to take a further step, and 
to discard our other conviction that we are perceiving a world of actual 



Organisms and Environment 123 

things within which we find ourselves. For a barren, extensive world is not 
really what we mean. We thus reduce perceptions to consciousness of 
impressions on the mind, consisting of sensa with 'manners' of related- 
ness. We then come to Hume, and to Kant. Kant's philosophy is an en- 
deavour to retrieve some meaning for the two convictions which we have 
successively discarded. We have noted that Locke wavers in his account of 
perception, so that in the earlier portion of his Essay he agrees with Hume, 
and in the later portion with the philosophy of organism. We have also 
noted that Hume is inconsistent to the extent of arguing from a convic- 
tion which is discarded in his philosophy. 

SECTION VIII 

[188] Presentational immediacy illustrates the contemporary world in re- 
spect to its potentiality for extensive subdivision into atomic actualities 
and in respect to the scheme of perspective relationships which thereby 
eventuates. But it gives no information as to the actual atomization of 
this contemporary 'real potentiality/ By its limitations it exemplifies the 
doctrine, already stated above, that the contemporary world happens in- 
dependently of the actual occasion with which it is contemporary. This is 
in fact the definition of contemporaneousness (cf. Part II, Ch. II, Sect. I); 
namely, that actual occasions, A and B, are mutually contemporary, when 
A does not contribute to the datum for B, and B does not contribute to 
the datum for A, except that both A and B are atomic regions in the po- 
tential scheme of spatio-temporal extensiveness which is a datum for both 
A and B. 

Hume's polemic respecting causation is, in fact, one prolonged, con- 
vincing argument that pure presentational immediacy does not disclose 
any causal influence, either whereby one actual entity is constitutive of 
the percipient actual entity, or whereby one perceived actual entity is con- 
stitutive of another perceived actual entity. The conclusion is that, in so 
far as concerns their disclosure by presentational immediacy, actual en- 
tities in the contemporary universe are causally independent of each other. 

The two pure modes of perception in this way disclose a variety of loci 
defined by reference to the percipient occasion M. For example, there are 
the actual occasions of the settled world which provide the datum for M; 
these lie in M's causal past. Again, there are the potential occasions for 
which M decides its own potentialities of contribution to their data; these 
lie in M's causal future. There are also those actual occasions which lie 
neither in M's causal past, nor in M's causal future. Such actual occasions 
are called M's 'contemporaries/ These \189] three loci are defined solely 
by reference to the pure mode of causal efficacy. 

We now turn to the pure mode of presentational immediacy. One great 
difference from the previous way+ of obtaining loci at once comes into 
view. In considering the causal mode, the past and the future were de- 



124 Discussions and Applications 

fined positively, and the contemporaries of M were defined negatively as 
lying neither in M's past nor in JVf s future. In dealing with presentational 
immediacy the opposite way must be taken. For presentational immediacy 
gives positive information only about the immediate present as defined by 
itself. Presentational immediacy illustrates, by means of sensa, potential 
subdivisions within a cross-section of the world, which is in this way ob- 
jectified for M. This cross-section is JVPs immediate present. What is in 
this way illustrated is the potentiality for subdivision into actual atomic 
occasions; we can also recognize potentialities for subdivision of regions 
whose subdivisions remain unillustrated by any contrast of sensa. There 
are well-known limitations to such direct perceptions of unillustrated po- 
tentiality, a perception outrunning the real illustration of division by con- 
trasted sensa. Such limitations constitute the minima sensibilia. 

Hume's polemic respecting causation constitutes a proof that M's 'im- 
mediate present' lies within the locus of M's contemporaries. The presen- 
tation to M of this locus, forming its immediate present, contributes to 
M's datum two facts about the universe: one fact is that there is a 'unison 
of becoming/ constituting a positive relation of all the occasions in this 
community to any one of them. The members of this community share in 
a common immediacy; they are in 'unison' as to their becoming: that is 
to say, any pair of occasions in the locus are contemporaries. The other 
fact is the subjective illustration of the potential extensive subdivision 
with complete vagueness respecting the actual atomization. For example, 
the stone, which in the immediate [190] present is a group of many actual 
occasions, is illustrated as one grey spatial region. But, to go back to the 
former fact, the many actual entities of the present stone and the per- 
cipient are connected together in the 'unison of immediate becoming.' 
This community of concrescent occasions, forming M's immediate present, 
thus establishes a principle of common relatedness, a principle realized as 
an element in M's datum. This is the principle of mutual relatedness in 
the 'unison of becoming/ But this mutual relatedness is independent of 
the illustration by those sensa t through which presentational immediacy 
for M is effected. Also the illustration by these sensa has unequal relevance 
for M, throughout the locus. In its spatially remote parts it becomes vaguer 
and vaguer, fainter and fainter; and yet the principle of 'unison of be- 
coming' still holds, in despite of the fading importance of the sensa. We 
thus find that the locus— namely, M's immediate present— is determined 
by the condition of 'mutual unison' independently of variations of rele- 
vant importance in M's illustrative sensa, and extends to their utmost 
bounds of faintness, and is equally determinate beyond such bounds. We 
thus gain the conception of a locus in which any two atomic actualities 
are in 'concrescent unison,' and which is particularized by the fact that M 
belongs to it, and so do all actual occasions belonging to extensive regions 
which lie in M's immediate present as illustrated by importantly relevant 
sensa. This complete region is the prolongation of M's immediate present 



Organisms and Environment 125 

beyond M's direct perception, the prolongation being effected by the 
principle of 'concrescent unison/ 

A complete region, satisfying the principle of 'concrescent unison/ will 
be called a 'duration/ A duration is a cross-section of the universe; it is 
the immediate present condition of the world at some epoch, according to 
the old 'classical' theory of time— a theory never doubted until within the 
last few years. It will have been seen that the philosophy of organism 
accepts and defines this [191] notion. Some measure of acceptance is 
imposed upon metaphysics. If the notion be wholly rejected no appeal to 
universal obviousness of conviction can have any weight; since there can 
be no stronger instance of this force of obviousness. 

The 'classical' theory of time tacitly assumed that a duration included 
the directly perceived immediate present of each one of its members. The 
converse proposition certainly follows from the account given above, that 
the immediate present of each actual occasion lies in a duration. An actual 
occasion will be said 6 to be 'cogredientf with' or 'stationary in' the dura- 
tion including its directly perceived immediate present. The actual occa- 
sion is included in its own immediate present; so that each actual occa- 
sion through its percipience in the pure mode of presentational imme- 
diacy—if such percipience has important relevance— defines one duration 
in which it is included. The percipient occasion is 'stationary' in this 
duration. 

But the classical theory also assumed the converse of this statement. It 
assumed that any actual occasion only lies in one duration; so that if N 
lies in the duration including M's immediate present, then M lies in the 
duration including N's immediate present. The philosophy of organism, in 
agreement with recent physics, rejects this conversion; though it holds that 
such rejection is based on scientific examination of our cosmic epoch, and 
not on any more general metaphysical principle. According to the philoso- 
phy of organism, in the present cosmic epoch only one duration includes 
all M's immediate present; this one duration will be called M's 'presented 
duration.' But M itself lies in many durations; each duration including M 
also includes some portions of M's presented duration. In the case of 
human perception practically all the important portions are thus included; 
also in human experience the relationship to such dura- \192] tions is what 
we express by the notion of 'movement/ 

To sum up this discussion. In respect to any one actual occasion M 
there are three distinct nexus of occasions to be considered: 

(i) The nexus of M's contemporaries, defined by the characteristic that 
M and any one of its contemporaries happen in causal independence of 
each other. 

(ii) Durations including M;f any such duration is defined by the char- 
acteristic that any two of its members are contemporaries. (It follows that 

6 Cf. my Principles of Natural Knowledge, Ch. XI, and my Concept of Nature, 
Ch. V. 



126 Discussions and Applications 

any member of such a duration is contemporary with M, and thence that 
such durations are all included in the locus (i). The characteristic prop- 
erty of a duration is termed 'unison of becoming/) 

(iii) M's presented locus, which is the contemporary nexus perceived in 
the mode of presentational immediacy, with its regions defined by sensa. 
It is assumed, on the basis of direct intuition, that JVf s presented locus is 
closely related to some one duration including M. It is also assumed, as 
the outcome of modern physical theory, that there is more than one dura- 
tion including M. The single duration which is so related to M's presented 
locus is termed 'JVf s presented duration/ But this connection is criticized 
in the following sections of this chapter. In Part IV, the connection of 
these 'presented' loci to regions defined by straight lines is considered in 
more detail; the notion of 'strain-loci'* is there introduced. 

SECTION IX 

Physical science has recently arrived at the stage in which the practical 
identification, made in the preceding section, between the 'presented 
locus' of an actual entity, and a locus in 'unison of becoming with the 
actual entity must be qualified. 

The two notions, 'presented locus' and 'unison of becoming/ are dis- 
tinct. The identification merely rests on the obvious experience of daily 
life. In any recasting of [193] thought it is obligatory to include the iden- 
tification as a practical approximation to the truth, sufficient for daily life. 
Subject to this limitation, there is no reason for rejecting any distinction 
between them which the evidence suggests. 

In the first place, the presented locus is defined by some systematic 
relation to the human body— so far as we rely, as we must, upon human 
experience. A certain state of geometrical strain in the body, and a certain 
qualitative physiological excitement in the cells of the body, govern the 
whole process of presentational immediacy. In sense-perception the whole 
function of antecedent occurrences outside the body is merely to excite 
these strains and physiological excitements within the body. But any 
other means of production would do just as well, so long as the relevant 
states of the body are in fact produced. The perceptions are functions of 
the bodily states. The geometrical details of the projected sense-perception 
depend on the geometrical strains in the body, the qualitative sensa de- 
pend on the physiological excitements of the requisite cells in the body. 

Thus the presented locus must be a locus with a systematic geometrical 
relation to the body. According to all the evidence, it is completely inde- 
pendent of the contemporary actualities which in fact make up the nexus 
of actualities in the locus. For example, we see a picture on the wall with 
direct vision. But if we turn our back to the wall, and gaze into a good 
mirror, we see the same sight as an image behind the mirror. Thus, given 
the proper physiological state of the body, the locus presented in sense- 



Organisms and Environment 127 

perception is independent of the details of the actual happenings which 
it includes. This is not to sayt that sense-perception is irrelevant to the 
real world. It demonstrates to us the real extensive continuum in terms of ** 
which these contemporary happenings have their own experiences quali- 
fied. Its additional information in terms of the qualitative sensa has rele- 
vance in proportion to the relevance of the immediate bodily state to the 
imme- [194] diate happenings throughout the locus. Both are derived 
from a past which is practically common to them all. Thus there is always 
some relevance; the correct interpretation of this relevance is the art of 
utilizing the perceptive mode of presentational immediacy as a means for 
understanding the world as a medium. 

But the question which is of interest for this discussion is how this 
systematic relevance, of body to presented locus, is definable. This is not a 
mere logical question. The problem is to point out that element in the 
nature of things constituting such a geometrical relevance of the bodv to 
the presented locus. If there be such an element, we can understand that a 
certain state of the body may lift it into an important factor of our 
experience. 

The only possible elements capable of this extended systematic relevance 
beyond the body are straight lines and planes. Planes are definable in 
terms of straight lines, so that we can concentrate attention upon straight 
lines. 

It is a dogma of science that straight lines are not definable in terms of 
mere notions of extension. Thus, in the expositions of recent physical 
theory, straight lines are defined in terms of the actual physical happenings. 
The disadvantage of this doctrine is that there is no method of charac- 
terizing the possibilities of physical events antecedently to their actual 
occurrence. It is easy to verify that in fact there is a tacit relevance to an 
underlying system, by reference to which the physical loci— including those 
called 'straight lines'— are defined. The question is how to define this un- 
derlying system in terms of 'pure' straight lines, determinable without ref- 
erence to the casual** details of the happenings. 

It will be shown later (cf. Part IV, Chs. Ill and IV) that this dogma of 
the indefinability of straight lines is mistaken. Thus the systematic relation 
of the body to the presented locus occasions no theoretical difficulty. 

All measurement is effected by observations of sensa [195] with geo- 
metrical relations within this presented locus. Also all scientific observa- 
tion of the unchanged character of things ultimately depends! upon the 
maintenance of directly observed geometrical analogies within such loci. 

However far the testing of instruments is carried, finally all scientific 
interpretation is based upon the assumption of directly observed unchange- 
ably of some instrument for seconds, for hours, for months, for years. 
When we test this assumption we can only use another instrument; and 
there! cannot be an infinite regress of instruments. 

Thus ultimately all science depends upon direct observation of homol- 



128 Discussions and Applications 

ogy of status within a system. Also the observed system is the complex of 
geometrical relations within some presented locus. 

In the second place, a locus of entities in 'unison of becoming' ob- 
viously depends on the particular actual entities. The question, as to how 
the extensive continuum is in fact atomized by the atomic actualities, is 
relevant to the determination of the locus. The factor of temporal en- 
durance selected for any one actuality will depend upon its initial 'sub- 
jective aim/ The categoreal conditions which govern the 'subjective aim' 
are discussed later in Part III. They consist generally in satisfying some 
condition of a maximum, to be obtained by the transmission of inherited 
types of order. This is the foundation of the 'stationary' conditions in 
terms of which the ultimate formulations of physical science can be 
mathematically expressed. 

Thus the loci of 'unison of becoming' are only determinable in terms of 
the actual happenings of the world. But the conditions which they satisfy 
are expressed in terms of measurements derived from the qualification of 
actualities by the systematic character of the extensive continuum. 

The term 'duration' will be used for a locus of 'unison of becoming/ 
and the terms 'presented locus' and 'strain- [196] locus' for the systematic 
locus involved in presentational immediacy. 7 

The strain-loci provide the systematic geometry with its homology of 
relations throughout all its regions; the durations share in the deficiency of 
homology characteristic of the physical field which arises from the pe- 
culiarities of the actual events. 

SECTION X 

We can now sum up this discussion of organisms, order, societies,! nexus. 

The aim of the philosophy of organism is to express a coherent cos- 
mology based upon the notions of 'system,' 'process/ 'creative advance into 
novelty,' 'res vera! (in Descartes' sense), 'stubborn fact/ 'individual unity of 
experience,' 'feeling/ 'time as perpetual perishing/ 'endurance as re-crea- 
tion/ 'purpose,' 'universals as forms of defmiteness/ 'particulars— i.e., res 
verae—as ultimate agents of stubborn fact.' 

Every one of these notions is explicitly formulated either by Descartes 
or by Locke. Also no one can be dropped without doing violence to com- 
mon sense. But neither Descartes nor Locke weaves these notions into one 
coherent system of cosmology. In so far as either philosopher is systematic, 
he relies on alternative notions which in the end lead to Hume's extreme 
of sensationalism. 

In the philosophy of organism it is held that the notion of 'organism' 
has two meanings, interconnected but intellectually separable, namely, 
the microscopic meaning and the macroscopic meaning.** The microscopic 

7 In The Concept of Nature these two loci were not discriminated, namely, 
durations and strain-loci. 



Organisms and Environment 129 

meaning is concerned with the formal constitution of an actual occasion, 
considered as a process of realizing an individual unity of experience. The 
macroscopic meaning is concerned with the givenness of the actual world, 
considered as the stubborn fact which at once limits and provides [197] 
opportunity for the actual occasion. The canalization of the creative urge, 
exemplified in its massive reproduction of social nexus, is for common 
sense the final illustration of the power of stubborn fact. Also in our ex- 
perience, we essentially arise out of our bodies which are the stubborn 
facts of the immediate relevant past. We are also carried on by our im- 
mediate past of personal experience; we finish a sentence because we have 
begun it. The sentence may embody a new thought, never phrased before, 
or an old one rephrased with verbal novelty. There need be no well-worn 
association between the sounds of the earlier and the later words. But it 
remains remorselessly true, that we finish a sentence because we have be- 
gun it. We are governed by stubborn fact. 

It is in respect to this 'stubborn fact' that the theories of modern philos- 
ophy are weakest. Philosophers have worried themselves about remote 
consequences, and the inductive formulations of science. They should con- 
fine attention to the rush of immediate transition. Their explanations 
would then be seen in their native absurdity. 



CHAPTER V 
LOCKE AND HUME 

SECTION I 

[198] A more detailed discussion of Descartes, Locke, and Hume— in 
this and in the succeeding chapter— may make plain how deeply the philos- 
ophy of organism is founded on seventeenth-century thought and how at 
certain critical points it diverges from that thought 

We shall understand better the discussion, if we start with some analysis 
of the presuppositions upon which Hume's philosophy rests. These pre- 
suppositions were not original to Hume, nor have they ceased with him. 
They were largely accepted by Kant and are widely prevalent in modern 
philosophy. The philosophy of organism can be best understood by con- 
ceiving it as accepting large portions of the expositions of Hume and Kant, 
with the exception of these presuppositions, and of inferences directly 
derived from them. Hume is a writer of unrivalled clearness; and, as far as 
possible ? it will be well to allow him to express his ideas in his own words. 
He writes: 

We may observe, that it is universally allowed by philosophers, 
and is besides pretty obvious of itself, that nothing is ever really pres- 
ent with the mind but its perceptions or impressions and ideas, and 
that external objects become known to us only by those perceptions 
they occasion. To hate, to love, to think, to feel, to see; all this is 
nothing but to perceive. 1 
Again: 

All the perceptions of the human mind resolve themselves into 
two distinct kinds, which I shall call impressions and ideas. The 
difference betwixt these consists in [199] the degrees of force and live- 
liness, with which they strike upon the mind, and make their way into 
our thought or consciousness. Those perceptions which enter with 
most force and violence, we may name impressions; and, under this 
name, I comprehend all our sensations, passions, and emotions, as 
they make their first appearance in the soul. By ideas, I mean the 
faint images of these in thinking and reasoning; such as, for instance, 
are all the perceptions excited by the present discourse, excepting only 
those which arise from the sight and touch, and excepting the imme- 
diate pleasure or uneasiness it may occasion, 2 

1 Treatise, Bk. I, Part II, Sect. VI. 

2 Treatise, Bk. I, Part I, Sect. I. 



Locke and Hume 131 

The exceptions made in the above quotation are, of course, due to the 
fact that the 'perceptions' arising in these excepted ways are 'impressions' 
and not 'ideas/ Hume immediately draws attention to the fact that he 
deserts Locke's wide use of the term 'idea/ and restores it to its more usual 
and narrow meaning. He divides both ideas and impressions into 'simple' 
and 'complex/ He then adds: 

... we shall here content ourselves with establishing one general 
proposition, That all our simple ideas in their first appearance, are 
derived from simple impressions, which are correspondent to them, 
and which they exactly represent? 

When Hume passes on to complex impressions and ideas, his admirable 
clearness partially deserts him. He fails to distinguish sufficiently between 
(i) the ' ( manner' (or 'order') in which many simples constitute some one 
complex perception, i.e., impression or idea; and (ii) the efficacious fact by 
reason of which this complex perception arises; and (iii) the mere multi- 
plicity of simples which constitute the complex perception in this definite 
manner. In this respect Hume's followers only differ from Hume by dis- 
carding some of that clarity which never wholly deserts him. Each one of 
these three notions is an essential element in his argument. He writes: 
[200] ... we may conclude with certainty, that the idea of extension is 
nothing but a copy of these coloured f points, and of the manner of 
their appearance. 4 
Also he writes: 

Were ideas entirely loose and unconnected, chancef alone would 
join them; and it is impossible the same simple ideas should! fall 
regularly into complex ones (as they commonly do), without some 
bond of union among them, some associating quality, by which one 
idea naturally introduces another. This uniting principle among ideas 
is not to be considered as an inseparable connection; for that has been 
already 5 excluded from the imagination: nor yet are we to conclude, 
that without it the mind cannot join two ideas; for nothing is more 
free than that faculty: but we are only to regard it as a gentle force, 
which commonly prevails, and is the cause why, among other things, 
languages so nearly correspond to each other; Nature, in a manner, 
pointing out to every one those simple ideas, which are most proper 
to be united into a complex one. 6 
As a final quotation, to illustrate Hume's employment of the third no- 
tion, we have: 
The idea of a substance as well as that of a mode, is nothing but a col- 
lection of simple ideas, that are united by the imagination, and have a 
particular name assigned them, . . . But the difference betwixt these 

3 Treatise, Bk. I, Part I, Sect. I. 

4 Treatise, Bk. I, Part II, Sect. III. 

5 Cf. Hume's previous section. 

6 Treatise, Bk. I, Part I, Sect. IV. 



132 Discussions and Applications 

ideas consists in this, that the particular qualities, which form at sub- 
stance, are commonly referred to an unknown something [italics 
Hume's], in which they are supposed to inhere; or granting this fiction 
should not take place, are at least supposed to be closely and in- 
separably connected by the relations of contiguity and causation. 
The effect of this is, that whatever new simple quality we discover to 
have the same connection with the rest, we immediately comprehend 
it among them, even though it did not enter into the first conception 
of the substance. . . . The principle of union being regarded as the 
chief part of the complex [201] idea, gives entrance to whatever qual- 
ity afterwards occurs, and is equally comprehended by it, as are the 
others, which first presented themselves. . . . 7 

In this last quotation, the phrase 'principle of union' is ambiguous as 
between 'manner' and 'efficacious' reason. In either sense, it is inconsistent 
with the phrase 'nothing but a collection,' which at the beginning of \fhe 
quotation settles so simply the notion of 'substance.' 

Returning to the first of this sequence of three quotations, we note that 
any particular 'manner' of composition must itself be a simple idea, or im- 
pression. For otherwise we require yet another 'manner' of composition 
for the original manner, and so on indefinitely. Thus there is either a 
vicious infinity or a final simple idea. But Hume admits that there are 
novel compound ideas which are not copies of compound impressions. 
Thus he should also admit that there is a novel simple idea conveying the 
novel 'manner,' which is not a copy of an impression. He has also himself 
drawn attention to another exception in respect to missing shades of 
colour in a graduated colour scheme. This exception cannot be restricted 
to colour, and must be extended to sound, and smell, and to all gradua- 
tions of sensations. Thus Hume's proposition, that simple ideas are all 
copies of simple impressions, is subject to such considerable qualifications 
that it cannot be taken for an ultimate philosophical principle, at least 
not when enunciated in Hume's unguarded fashion. Hume himself, in 
the passage (Part I, Sect. IV) quoted above for its relevance to his doc- 
trine of the association of ideas, says, ". . . for nothing is more free than 
that faculty [i.e., the imagination]." But he limits its freedom to the 
production of novel complex ideas, disregarding the exceptional case of 
missing shades. This question of imaginative freedom is obviously treated 
very superficially by Hume. Imagination is never very free: it does not 
seem to be limited to complex ideas, as asserted by [202] him; but such 
freedom as it has in fact seems to establish the principle of the possibility 
of diverse actual entities with diverse grades of imaginative freedom, 
some more, some less, than the instances in question. 

In this discussion of Hume's doctrine of imaginative freedom, two 
other points have been left aside. One such point is the difference be- 

7 Treatise, Bk. I, Part I, Sect. VI. Italics not in edition quoted, except where 
noted.* 



Locke and Hume 133 

tween various grades of generic abstraction, for example, scarlet, red ? 
colour, sense-datum, manner of connectedness of diverse sense-data. The 
other point is the contrast between 'simplicity' and 'complexity/ We may 
doubt whether 'simplicity' is ever more than a relative term, having regard 
to some definite procedure of analysis. I hold this to be the case; and by 
reason of this opinion find yet another reason for discarding Hume's 
doctrine which would debar imagination from the free conceptual pro- 
duction of any type of eternal objects, such as Hume calls 'simple/ But 
there is no such fact as absolute freedom; every actual entity possesses 
only such freedom t as is inherent in the primary phase 'given' by its stand- 
point of relativity to its actual universe. Freedom, givenness, potentiality, 
are notions which presuppose each other and limit each other. 

SECTION II 

Hume, at the end of this passage on the connectedness of ideas, places 
the sentence "... Nature, in a manner, pointing out to every one those 
simple ideas, which are most proper to be united into a complex one." * 
Hume's philosophy is occupied with the double search, first, for manners 
of unity, whereby many simples become one complex impression; and 
secondly, for a standard of propriety by which to criticize the production 
of ideas. 

Hume can find only one standard of propriety, and that is, repetition. 
Repetition is capable of more or less: the more often impressions are 
repeated, the more proper it is that ideas should copy them. Fortunately, 
and without any reason so far as Hume can discover, complex [203] im- 
pressions, often repeated, are also often copied by their corresponding 
complex ideas. 

Also the frequency of ideas following upon the frequency of their cor- 
relate impressions is also attended by an expectation of the repetition of 
the impression. Hume also believes, without any reason he can assign, that 
this expectation is pragmatically justified. It is this pragmatic justification, 
without metaphysical reason, which constitutes the propriety attaching to 
'repetition/ This is the analysis of the course of thought involved in Hume's 
doctrine of the association of ideas in its relation to causation, and in 
Hume's final appeal to practice. 

It is a great mistake to attribute to Hume any disbelief in the importance 
of the notion of 'cause and effect/ Throughout the Treatise he steadily 
affirms its fundamental importance; and finally, when he cannot fit it into 
his metaphysics, he appeals beyond his metaphysics to an ultimate justifi- 
cation outside any rational systematization. This ultimate justification is 
'practice/ 

Hume writes: 

As our senses show us in one instance two bodies, or motions, or 

qualities, in certain relations of succession and contiguity, so our 

memory presents us only with a multitude of instances wherein we 



134 Discussions and Applications 

always find like bodies, motions, or qualities, in like relations. From 
the mere repetition of any past impression, even to infinity, there 
never will arise any new original idea, such as that of a necessary 
connection; and the number of impressions has in this case no more 
effect than if we confined ourselves to one only. But though this rea- 
soning seems just and obvious, yet, as it would be folly to despair too 
soon, we shall continue the thread of our discourse; and having found, 
that after the discovery of the constant conjunction of any objects, we 
always draw an inference from one object to another, we shall now 
examine the nature of that inference, and of the transition from the 
impression to the idea. Perhaps it will appear in the end, that the 
necessary connection depends on the inference, instead of the in- 
ference's depending on [204} the necessary connection. . . . The only 
connection or relation of objects, which can lead us beyond the im- 
mediate impressions of our memory and senses, is that of cause and 
effect; and that because it is the only one, on which we can found a 
just inference from one object to another. The idea of cause and 
effect is derived from experience [italics Hume's], which informs us, 
that such particular objects, in all past instances, have been con- 
stantly conjoined with each other: and as an object similar to one of 
these is supposed to be immediately present in its impression, we 
thence presume on the existence of one similar to its usual attendant. 
According to this account of things, which is, I think, in every point 
unquestionable, probability is founded on the presumption of a re- 
semblance betwixt those objects of which we have had experience, 
and those of which we have had none; and, therefore, it is impossible 
t this presumption can arise from probability* 

Hume's difficulty with 'cause and effect' is that it lies "beyond the im- 
mediate impressions of our memory and senses."! In other words, this man- 
ner of connection is not given in any impression. Thus the whole basis of 
the idea, its propriety, is to be traced to the repetition of impressions. At 
this point of his argument, Hume seems to have overlooked the difficulty 
that 'repetition' stands with regard to 'impressions' in exactly the same 
position as does 'cause and effect.' Hume has confused a 'repetition of 
impressions' with an 'impression of repetitions of impressions/ In Hume's 
own words on another topic (Part II, Sect. V) : 
For whence should it be derived? Does it arise from an impression of 
sensation or of reflection? Point it out distinctly to us, that we may 
know its nature and qualities. But if you cannot point out any such 
impression [Hume's italics], you may be certain you are mistaken, 
when you imagine you have any such idea* 

Hume's answer to this criticism would, of course, be [205} that he ad- 
mits 'memory.' But the question is what is consistent with Hume's own 

8 Treatise, Bk. I, Part III, Sect. VI. Italics not in Treatise. 



Locke and Hume 135 

doctrine. This is Hume's doctrine of memory (Part III, Sect. V): "Since 
therefore the memory is known, neither by the order of its complex ideas, 
nor f the nature of its simple ones; it follows, that the difference be- 
twixt it and the imagination lies in its superior force and vivacity." But (in 
Part I, Sect. I) he writes: "By ideas I mean the faint images of these [i.e., 
impressions] in thinking and reasoning/' and later on he expands 'faint' 
into "degree of force and vivacity." 9 Thus, purely differing in 'force and 
vivacity/ we have the order: impressions, memories, ideas. 

This doctrine is very implausible; and, to speak bluntly, is in contradic- 
tion to plain fact. But, even worse, it omits the vital character of memory, 
namely, that it is memory. In fact the whole notion of repetition is lost in 
the 'force and vivacity doctrine. What Hume does explain is that with a 
number of different perceptions immediately concurrent, he sorts them 
out into three different classes according to force and vivacity. But the 
repetition character, which he ascribes to simple ideas, and which is the 
whole point of memory, finds no place in his explanation. Nor can it do 
so, without an entire recasting of his fundamental philosophic notions. 

SECTION III 

Hume's argument has become circular. In the beginning of his Treatise, 
he lays down the 'general proposition': "That all our simple ideas in their 
first appearance, are derived from simple impressions, . . ." He proves this 
by an empirical survey. But the proposition itself employs— covertly, so far 
as language is concerned— the notion of 'repetition/ which itself is not an 
'impression/ Again, later he finds 'necessary connection': he discards \206] 
this because he can find no corresponding impression. But the original 
proposition was only founded on an empirical survey; so the argument for 
dismissal is purely circular. Further, if Hume had only attended to his 
own excellent Part II, Section VI, "Of the Idea of Existence, and of external 
Existence,"! he would have remembered that whatever we do think of, 
thereby in some sense 'exists.' Thus, having the idea of 'necessary con- 
nection/ the only question is as to its exemplification in the connectedness 
of our 'impressions.' He muddies the importance of an idea with the fact 
of our entertainment of the idea. We cannot even be wrong in thinking 
that we think of 'necessary connection/ unless we are thinking of 'neces- 
sary connection.' Of course, we may be very wrong in believing that the 
notion is important. 

The reasons for this examination of Hume, including the prolonged 
quotations, are (i) that Hume states with great clearness important as- 
pects of our experience; (ii) that the defects in his statements are emi- 

9 This doctrine of 'force and vivacity' is withdrawn in the last sentence* of 
Hume's Appendix to the Treatise. But the argument in the Treatise is substan- 
tially built upon it. In the light of the retraction the whole 'sensationalist' doc- 
trine requires reconsideration. The withdrawal cannot be treated as a minor 
adjustment. 



1 36 Discussions and Applications 

nently natural defects which emerge with great clearness, owing to the 
excellence of his presentation; and (iii) that Hume differs from the great 
majority of his followers chiefly by the way in which he faces up to the 
problems raised by his own philosophy. 

The first point to notice is that Hume's philosophy is pervaded by the 
notion of 'repetition/ and that memory is a particular example of this 
character of experience, that in some sense there is entwined in its funda- 
mental nature the fact that it is repeating something. Tear 'repetition' out 
of 'experience/ and there is nothing left. On the other hand, 'immediacy/ 
or 'first-handedness/ is another element in experience. Feeling overwhelms 
repetition; and there remains the immediate, first-handed fact, which is the 
actual world in an immediate complex unity of feeling. 

There is another contrasted pair of elements in experience, clustering 
round the notion of time, namely, 'endurance' and 'change/ Descartes, 
who emphasizes the notion [207] of 'substance/ also emphasizes 'change/ 
Hume, who minimizes the notion of 'substance/ similarly emphasizes 
'change/ He writes: 
Now as time is composed of parts that are not coexistent, an un- 
changeable object, since it produces none but coexistent impressions, 
produces none that can give us the idea of time: and, consequently, 
that idea must be derived from a succession of changeable objects, 
and time in its first appearance can never be severed from such a 
succession. 10 
Whereas Descartes writes: 

... for this [i.e., 'the nature of time or of the duration of things'] is 
of such a kind that its parts do not depend one upon the other, and 
never co-exist; and from the fact that we now are, it does not follow 
that we shall be a moment afterwards, if some cause— the same that 
first produced us— does not continue so to produce us; that is to say, 
to conserve us. 
And again: 

We shall likewise have a very different understanding of duration, 
order and number, if, in place of mingling with the idea that we 
have of them what properly speaking pertains to the conception of sub- 
stance, we merely consider that the duration of each thing is a mode 
under which we shall consider this thing in so far as it continues to 
exist; . . , 11 

We have certainly to make room in our philosophy for the two con- 
trasted notions, one that every actual entity endures, and the other that 
every morning is a new fact with its measure of change. 

These various aspects can be summed up in the statement that ex- 
perience involves a becoming, that becoming means that something be- 

10 Treatise, Bk. I, Part II, Sect. III. 

11 Principles, Part I, 21, and 55. 



Locke and Hume 1 37 

comes, and that what becomes involves repetition transformed into novel 
immediacy. 

This statement directly traverses one main presupposition which Des- 
cartes and Hume agree in stating explicitly. This presupposition is that of 
the individual independence of successive temporal occasions. For [208] 
example, Descartes, in the passage cited above, writes: "[The nature of 
time is such]t that its parts do not depend one upon the other, . . ." Also 
Hume's impressions are self-contained, and he can find no temporal re- 
lationship other than mere serial order. This statement about Hume re- 
quires qualifying so far as concerns the connection between 'impressions' 
and 'ideas/ There is a relation of 'derivation' of 'ideas' from 'impressions' 
which he is always citing and never discussing. So far as it is to be taken 
seriously — for he never refers it to a correlate 'impression'— it constitutes 
an exception to the individual independence of successive 'perceptions.' 
This presupposition of individual independence is what I have elsewhere 12 
called, the 'fallacy of simple location.' The notion of 'simple location' is 
inconsistent with any admission of 'repetition'; Hume's difficulties arise 
from the fact that he starts with simple locations and ends with repetition. 
In the organic philosophy the notion of repetition is fundamental. The 
doctrine of objectification is an endeavourf to express how what is settled 
in actuality is repeated under limitations, so as to be 'given' for immediacy. 
Later, in discussing 'time,' this doctrine will be termed the doctrine of 
'objective immortality.' 

SECTION IV 

The doctrine of the individual independence of real facts is derived 
from the notion that the subject-predicate form of statement conveys a 
truth which is metaphysically ultimate. According to this view, an indi- 
vidual substance with its predicates constitutes the ultimate type of ac- 
tuality. If there be one individual, the philosophy is monistic; if there be 
many individuals, the philosophy is pluralistic. With this metaphysical 
presupposition, the relations between individual substances constitute 
metaphysical nuisances: there is no place for them. Accordingly— in de- 
fiance of the most obvious deliverance of our intuitive 'prejudices'— every 
[209] respectable philosophy of the subject-predicate type is monistic. 

The exclusive dominance of the substance-quality metaphysics was enor- 
mouslv promoted by the logical bias of the mediaeval period. It was re- 
tarded by the study of Plato and of Aristotle. These authors included the 
strains of thought which issued in this doctrine, but included them in- 
consistently mingled with other notions. The substance-quality meta- 
physics triumphed with exclusive dominance in Descartes' doctrines. Un- 
fortunately he did not realize that his notion of the 'res vera' did not en- 
tail the same disjunction of ultimate facts as that entailed by the Aris- 

12 Cf. Science and the Modem World, Ch. III. 



1 38 Discussions and Applications 

totelian notion of 'primary substance/ Locke led a revolt from this dom- 
inance, but inconsistently. For him and also for Hume, in the background 
and tacitly presupposed in all explanations, there remained the mind with 
its perceptions. The perceptions, for Hume, are what the mind knows 
about itself; and tacitly the knowable facts are always treated as qualities 
of a subject— the subject being the mind. His final criticism of the notion 
of the 'mind' does not alter the plain fact that the whole of the previous 
discussion has included this presupposition. Hume's final criticism only 
exposes the metaphysical superficiality of his preceding exposition. 

In the philosophy of organism a subject-predicate proposition is con- 
sidered as expressing a high abstraction. 

The metaphysical superiority of Locke over Hume is exhibited in his 
wide use of the term 'idea/ which Locke himself introduced and Hume 
abandoned. Its use marks the fact that his tacit subject-predicate bias is 
slight in its warping effect. He first (I, I, 8*) explains: "... I have used 
it [i.e., idea] to express whatever is meant by phantasm, notion, species, or 
whatever it is which the mind can be employed about in thinking; . . ." 
But later (III, III, 6t), without any explicit notice of the widening of 
use, he writes: ". . . and ideas become 13 \210] general by separating from 
them the circumstances of time, and place, and any other ideas that may 
determine them to this or that particular existence" Here, for Locke, the 
operations of the mind originate from ideas 'determined' to particular 
existents. This is a fundamental principle with Locke; it is a casual con- 
cession to the habits of language with Hume; and it is a fundamental 
principle with the philosophy of organism. In an earlier section (II, XXIII, 
1) Locke expresses more vaguely the same doctrine, though in this con- 
text he immediately waters it down into an unexplained notion of 'going 
constantly together': "The mind, being, . . . furnished with a great number 
of the simple ideas conveyed in by the senses, as they are found in ex- 
terior things, . . . takes notice, also, that a certain number of these simple 
ideas go constantly together" 

But Locke wavers in his use of this principle of some sort of perception 
of 'particular existents'; and Hume seeks consistency by abandoning it; 
while the philosophy of organism seeks to reconstruct Locke by abandon- 
ing those parts of his philosophy which are inconsistent with this prin- 
ciple. But the principle itself is to be found plainly stated by Locke. 

Hume has only impressions of 'sensation' and of 'reflection/ He writes: 
"The first kind arises in the soul originally, from unknown causes." 14 
Note the tacit presupposition of 'the soul' as subject, and 'impression of 
sensation' as predicate. Also note the dismissal of any intrinsic relevance to 
a particular existent, which is an existent in the same sense as the 'soul' is 
an existent; whereas Locke illustrates his meaning by referring (cf. Ill, 

13 Italics mine.* 

14 Treatise, Bk. I, Part I, Sect. II. 



Locke and Hume 139 

HI, 7) to a 'child —corresponding to 'the soul 7 in Hume's phrase— and to 
its 'nurse' of whom the child has its 'idea/ 

Hume is certainly inconsistent, because he cannot entirely disregard 
common sense. But his inconsistencies are violent, and his main argument 
negates Locke's use. [21 J] As an example of his glaring inconsistency of 
phraseology, note: 
As to those impressions, which arise from the senses, their ultimate 
cause is, in my opinion, perfectly inexplicable by human reason, and 
it will always be impossible to decide with certainty, whether they 
arrive immediately from the object, or are produced by the creative 
power of the mind, or are derived from the Author of our being. 15 
Here he inconsistently speaks of the object, whereas he has nothing on 
hand in his philosophy which justifies the demonstrative word 'the! In 
the second reference 'the object' has emerged into daylight. He writes: 
"There is no object which implies the existence of any other, if we con- 
sider these objects in themselves, and never look beyond the ideas which 
we form of them." This quotation exhibits an ingenious confusion whereby 
Hume makes the best of two metaphysical worlds, the world with Locke's 
principle, and his own world which is without Locke's principle. 

But Locke's principle amounts to this: That there are many actual 
existents, and that in some sense one actual existent repeats itself in 
another actual existent, so that in the analysis of the latter existent a 
component 'determined to' the former existent is discoverable. The phi- 
losophy of organism expresses this principle by its doctrines of 'prehen- 
sion' and of 'objectification.' Locke always supposes that consciousness is 
consciousness of the ideas in the conscious mind. But he never separates 
the 'ideas' from the 'consciousness.' The philosophy of organism makes 
this separation, and thereby relegates consciousness to a subordinate meta- 
physical position; and gives to Locke's Essay a metaphysical interpretation 
which was not in Locke's mind. This separation asserts Kant's principle: 
"Gedanken ohne Inhalt sind leer, Anschauungen ohne Begriffe sind 
blind." 16 But Kant's principle is here applied in exactly the converse way 
to Kant's own use of it. Kant is obsessed with the mentality [212] of 'in- 
tuition,' and hence f with its necessary involution in consciousness. His* 
suppressed premise is 'Intuitions are never blind.' 

SECTION V 

In one important respect Hume's philosophical conceptions show a 
marked superiority over those of Locke. In the Essay Concerning Human 
Understanding, the emphasis is laid upon the morphological structure of 
'human understanding.' The logical relationships of various sorts of 'ideas' 
are examined. Now, whether in physics, biology, or elsewhere, morphology, 

is Treatise, Bk. I, Part III, Sect. V; cf. also Sect. VI. f 

16 Critique of Pure Reason, Transcendental Logic,' Introduction, Sect. I.t 



140 Discussions and Applications 

in the sense of the analysis of logical relationships, constitutes the first 
stage of knowledge. It is the basis of the new 'mathematical' method 
which Descartes introduced. Morphology deals in analytical propositions, 
as they are termed by Kant. For example, Locke writes: "The common 
names of substances, as well as other general terms, stand for sorts: 
which 1? is nothing else but the being made signs of such complex ideas, 
wherein several particular substances do or might agree, by virtue of which 
they are capable of being comprehended in one common conception, and 
be signified by one name." And again: "Our abstract ideas are to us the 
measures of species." And again: "Nor let any one say, that the power of 
propagation in animals by the mixture of male and female, and in plants 
by seeds, keeps the supposed real species distinct and entire/ 7 18 In tech- 
nical language, Locke had no use for genetic evolution. 

On the other hand, Hume's train of thought unwittingly emphasizes 
'process/ His very scepticism is nothing but the discovery that there is 
something in the world which cannot be expressed in analytic proposi- 
tions. Hume discovered that "We murder to dissect/' He did not say 
this, because he belonged to the mid-eighteenth century; and so left the 
remark to Wordsworth. But, in [213] effect, Hume discovered that an ac- 
tual entity is at once a process, and is atomic; so that in no sense is it the 
sum of its parts. Hume proclaimed the bankruptcy of morphology. 

Hume's account of the process discoverable in 'the soul' is as follows: 
first, impressions of sensation, of unknown origin; then, ideas of such im- 
pressions, 'derived from' the impressions; then, impressions of reflection 
'derived from' the antecedent ideas; and then, ideas of impressions of re- 
flection. Somewhere in this process, there is to be found repetition of im- 
pressions, and thence by 'habit'— by which we may suppose that a par- 
ticular mode of 'derivation' is meant— by habit, a repetition of the cor- 
relate ideas; and thence expectancy of the repetition of the correlate im- 
pressions. This expectancy would be an 'impression or reflection.' It is 
difficult to understand why Hume exempts 'habit' from the same criticism 
as that applied to the notion of 'cause/ We have no 'impression' of 'habit/ 
just as we have no 'impression' of 'cause.' Cause, repetition, habit are all 
in the same boat. 

Somewhat inconsistently, Hume never allows impressions of sensation 
to be derived from the correlate ideas; though, as the difference between 
them only consists in 'force and vivacity,' the reason for this refusal can- 
not be found inl his philosophy. The truth is that Hume retained an 
obstinate belief in an external world which his principles forbade him to 
confess in his philosophical constructions. He reserved that belief for his 
daily life, and for his historical and sociological writings, and for his 
Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, 

The merit of Hume's account is that the process described is within 

17 Italics mine. 

18 III, VI, 1,22,23. 



Locke and Hume 141 

'the soul/ In the philosophy of organism 'the soul' as it appears in Hume, 
and 'the mind' as it appears in Locke and Hume, are replaced by the 
phrases 'the actual entity/ and 'the actual occasion/ these phrases being 
synonymous. 

Two defects, found equally in Locke and in Hume, are, first, the con- 
fusion between a Lockian 'idea' and [214] consciousness of such an idea; 
and, secondly, the assigned relations between 'ideas' of sensation and 
'ideas' of reflection.! In Hume's language, this latter point is concerned 
with the relations between 'impressions of sensation' and 'impressions of 
reflection.' Hume and Locke, with the overintellectualist bias prevalent 
among philosophers, assume that emotional feelings are necessarily deriva- 
tive from sensations. This is conspicuously not the case; the correlation 
between such feelings and sensations is on the whole a secondary effect. 
Emotions conspicuously brush aside sensations and fasten upon the 'par- 
ticular' objects to which— in Locke's phrase— certain 'ideas' are 'deter- 
mined. 7 The confinement of our prehension of other actual entities to the 
mediation of private sensations is pure myth. The converse doctrine is 
nearer the truth: the more primitive mode of objectification is via emo- 
tional tone, and only in exceptional organisms does objectification, via 
sensation, supervene with any effectiveness. In their doctrine on this 
point, Locke and Hume were probably only repeating the mediaeval tradi- 
tion, and they have passed on the tradition to their successors. None the 
less, the doctrine is founded upon no necessity of thought, and lacks 
empirical confirmation. If we consider the matter physiologically, the emo- 
tional tone depends mainly on the condition of the viscera which are 
peculiarly ineffective in generating sensations. Thus the whole notion of 
prehension should be inverted. We prehend other actual entities more 
primitively by direct mediation of emotional tone, and only secondarily 
and waveringly by direct mediation of sense. The two modes fuse with 
important effects upon our perceptive knowledge. This topic must be 
reserved (cf. Parts III and IV) for further discussion; but it is fundamental 
in the philosophy of organism. One difficulty in appealing to modern 
psychology, for the purpose of a preliminary survey of the nature of ex- 
perience, is that so much of that science is based upon the presupposition 
of the sensationalist mythology. Thus the sim- [215] pier, more naive sur- 
veys of Locke and Hume are philosophically the more useful. 

Later, in Part III, a 'prehension' will be analysed into 'prehending sub- 
ject/ 'object prehended/ and 'subjective form.' The philosophy of or- 
ganism follows Locke in admitting particular 'exterior things' into the 
category of 'object prehended.' It also follows Hume in his admission at 
the end of his Appendix to the Treatise: "Had I said, that two ideas of the 
same object can only be different by their different jeeling y I should have 
been nearer the truth." What Hume here calls 'feeling' is expanded in the 
philosophy of organism into the doctrine of 'subjective form.' But there is 
another ineradicable difference between some prehensions, namely, their 



142 Discussions and Applications 

diversity of prehending subjects, when the two prehensions are in that 
respect diverse. The subsequent uses of the term 'feeling' are in the sense 
of the positive' type of prehensions, and not in the sense in which Hume 
uses it in the above quotation. 

The approximation of the philosophy of organism to Santayana's doc- 
trine of 'animal faith' is effected by this doctrine of objectification by the 
mediation of 'feeling/ 

Santayana would deny that 'animal faith' has in it any element of given- 
ness. This denial is presumably made in deference to the sensationalist 
doctrine, that all knowledge of the external world arises by the mediation 
of private sensations. If we allow the term 'animal faith' to describe a 
kind of perception which has been neglected by the philosophic tradition, 
then practically the whole of Santayana's discussion 19 is in accord with 
the organic philosophy. 

The divergence from, and the analogy to, Santayana's doctrine can be 
understood by quoting two sentences: 
I propose therefore to use the word existence ... to designate not 
data of intuition but facts or events believed to occur in nature. These 
facts or events will include, first, intuitions themselves, or instances of 
con- [216] sciousness, like pains and pleasures and all remembered ex- 
periences and mental discourse; and second, physical things and 
events, having a transcendent relation to the data of intuition which, 
in belief, may be used as signs for them; . . .* 

It may be remarked in passing that this quotation illustrates Santayana's 
admirable clarity of thought, a characteristic which he shares with the men 
of genius of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Now the exact point 
where Santayana differs from the organic philosophy ist his implicit as- 
sumption that 'intuitions themselves* cannot be among the 'data of in- 
tuition/ that is to say, the data of other intuitions. This possibility is what 
Santayana denies and the organic philosophy asserts. In this respect 
Santayana is voicing the position which, implicitly or explicitly, pervades 
modern philosophy. He is only distinguished by his clarity of thought. If 
Santayana's position be granted, there is a phenomenal veil, a primitive 
credulity associated with action and valuation, and a mysterious symbolism 
from the veil to the realities behind the veil. The only difference between 
such philosophers lies in their reading of the symbolism, some read more 
and some less. There can be no decision between them, since there are no 
rational principles which penetrate from the veil to the dark background of 
reality. 

The organic philosophy denies this doctrine because, first, it is contrary 
to naive experience; secondly, 'memory' is a very special instance of an 
antecedent act of experience becoming a datum of intuition for another 
act of experience; thirdly, the rejected doctrine is derived from the mis- 

19 Cf . his Scepticism and Animal Faith. 



Locke and Hume 143 

conception of Locke, already noted previously (cf. Part II, Ch. I, Sect. 
VI), that logical simplicity can be identified with priority in the con- 
crescent process. Locke, in his first two books,t attempts to build up 
experience from the basic elements of simple 'ideas' of, sensation. These 
simple ideas are practically Santayana's 'intuitions of essences. 7 Santayana 
explicitly [217] repudiates the misconception, but in so doing he knocks 
away one of the supports of his doctrine. A fourth reason for the rejection 
of the doctrine is that the way is thereby opened for a rational scheme of 
cosmology in which a final reality is identified with acts of experience. 



CHAPTER VI 
FROM DESCARTES TO KANT 

SECTION I 

[218] A comparison of thet different ways in which Descartes and Locke 
respectively conceived the scope of their investigations at once discloses the 
very important shift which Locke introduced into the tradition of philo- 
sophic thought. Descartes asked the fundamental metaphysical question, 
What is it to be an actual entity? He found three kinds of actual entities, 
namely, cogitating minds, extended bodies, and God. His word for an 
actual entity was 'substance/ The fundamental proposition, whereby the 
analysis of actuality could be achieved, took the form of predicating a 
quality of the substance in question. A quality was either an accident or an 
essential attribute. In the Cartesian philosophy there was room for three 
distinct kinds of change: one was the change of accidents of an enduring 
substance; another was the origination of an individual substance; and the 
third was the cessation of the existence of an enduring substance. Any 
individual belonging to either of the first two kinds of substances did not 
require any other individual of either of these kinds in order to exist. But 
it did require the concurrence of God. Thus the essential attributes of a 
mind were its dependence on God and its cogitations; and the essential 
attributes of a body were its dependence on God and its extension. Des- 
cartes does not apply the term 'attribute' to the 'dependence on God ? ; but 
it is an essential element in his philosophy. It is quite obvious that the 
accidental relationships between diverse individual substances form a great 
difficulty for Descartes. If they are to be included in his scheme of the 
actual [219] world, they must be qualities of a substance. Thus a relation- 
ship is the correlation of a pair of qualities,! one belonging exclusively to 
one individual, and the other exclusively to the other individual. The cor- 
relaton itself must be referred to God as one of his accidental qualities. 
This is exactly Descartes' procedure in his theory of representative ideas. 
In this theory, the perceived individual has one quality; the perceiving in- 
dividual has anothert quality which is the 'idea' representing this quality; 
God is aware of the correlation; and the perceiver's knowledge of God 
guarantees for him the veracity of his idea. It is unnecessary to criticize 
this very artificial account of what common sense believes to be our direct 
knowledge of other actual entities. But it is the only account consistent 
with the metaphysical materials provided by Descartes, combined with his 
assumption of a multiplicity of actual entities. In this assumption of a 

144 



From Descartes To Kant 145 

multiplicity of actual entities the philosophy of organism follows Des- 
cartes. It is, however! obvious that there are only two ways out of Descartes* 
difficulties; one way is to have recourse to some form of monism; the other 
way is to reconstruct Descartes' metaphysical machinery. 

But Descartes asserts one principle which is the basis of all philosophy: 
he holds that the whole pyramid of knowledge is based upon the im- 
mediate operation of knowing which is either an essential (for Descartes), 
or a contributory, element in the composition of an immediate actual en- 
tity. This is also a first principle for the philosophy of organism. But 
Descartes allowed the subject-predicate form of proposition, and the 
philosophical tradition derived from it, to dictate his subsequent meta- 
physical development. For his philosophy, 'actuality' meant 'to be a sub- 
stance with inhering qualities/ For the philosophy of organism, the per- 
cipient occasion is its own standard of actuality. If in its knowledge other 
actual entities appear, it can only be because they conform to its standard 
of actuality. There can only be [220] evidence of a world of actual entities, 
if the immediate actual entity discloses them as essential to its own com- 
position. Descartes' notion of an unessential experience of the external 
world is entirely alien to the organic philosophy. This is the root point of 
divergence; and is the reason why the organic philosophy has to abandon 
any approach to the substance-quality notion of actuality. The organic 
philosophy interprets experience as meaning the 'self-enjoyment of being 
one among many, and of being one arising out of the composition of 
many/ Descartes interprets experience as meaning the 'self-enjoyment, by 
an individual substance, of its qualification by ideas/ t 

SECTION II 

Locke explicitly discards metaphysics. His enquiry has a limited scope: 
This therefore being my purpose, to inquire into the original, cer- 
tainty, and extent of human knowledge, together with the grounds and 
degrees of belief, opinion, and assent, I shall not at present meddle 
with the physical consideration of the mind, or trouble myself to 
examine wherein its essence consists, ... It shall suffice to my present 
purpose, to consider the discerning faculties of a man as they are em- 
ployed about the objects which they have to do with; . . } 

The enduring importance of Locke's work comes from the candour, 
clarity, and adequacy with which he stated the evidence, uninfluenced by 
the bias of metaphysical theory. He explained, in the sense of stating 
plainly, and not in the more usual sense of 'explaining away/ By an ironic 
development in the history of thought, Locke's successors, who arrogated 
to themselves the title of 'empiricists,' have been chiefly employed in ex- 
plaining away the obvious facts of experience in obedience to the a priori 
doctrine of sensationalism, inherited from the mediaeval philosophy which 

1 Essay, I, I, 2. 



146 Discussions and Applications 

they despised. Locke's Essay is the invaluable storehouse for those who 
wish to [221] confront their metaphysical constructions by a recourse to 
the facts. 

Hume clipped his explanation by this a priori theory, which he states 
explicitly in the first quotation made from his Treatise in the previous 
chapter. It cannot be too often repeated: 
We may observe, that it is universally allowed by philosophers, and is 
besides pretty obvious of itself, that nothing is ever really present with 
the mind but its perceptions f or impressions and ideas, and that ex- 
ternal objects become known to us only by those perceptions they 
occasion. To hate, to love, to think, to feel, to see; all this is nothing 
but to perceive. 

Hume, in agreement with what 'is universally allowed by philosophers/ 
interprets this statement in a sensationalist sense. In accordance with 
this sense, an impression is nothing else than a particular instance of the 
mind's awareness of a universal, which may either be simple, or may be a 
manner of union of many simple universals. For Hume, hating, loving, 
thinking, feeling, are nothing but perceptions derivate from these funda- 
mental impressions. This is the a priori sensationalist dogma, which bounds 
all Hume's discoveries in the realm of experience. It is probable that this 
dogma was in Locke's mind throughout the earlier portion of his Essay. 
But Locke was not seeking consistency with any a priori dogma. He also 
finds in experience 'ideas' with characteristics which 'determine them to 
this or that particular existent.' Such inconsistency with their dogma 
shocks empiricists, who refuse to admit experience, naked and unashamed, 
devoid of their a priori figleaf. Locke is merely stating what, in practice, 
nobody doubts. But Locke would have agreed with Hume in refusing to 
admit that 'ideas of reflection' may be directly 'determined to some par- 
ticular existent,' without the intervention of 'ideas of sensation.' In this 
respect, Locke was a sensationalist, and the philosophy of organism is not 
sensationalist. But Locke's avoidance of metaphysics only led him up to a 
stage of thought for which meta- [222] physics is essential to clarity. The 
questions as to the status of a 'particular existent,' and of an 'idea deter- 
mined to a particular existent,' demand metaphysical discussion. Locke is 
never tired of disparaging the notion of 'substance'; but he gives no hint of 
alternative categories which he would employ to analysef the notions of 
an 'actual entity' and of 'reality.' But his Essay, however, does contain a 
line of thought which can be developed into a metaphysic. In the first 
place, he distinctly holds that ideas of particular existents— for example, 
the child's idea of its mother —constitute the fundamental data which the 
mental functioning welds into a unity by a determinate process of ab- 
sorption, including comparison, emphasis, and abstraction. He also holds 
that 'powers' are to be ascribed to particular existents whereby the con- 
stitutions of other particulars are conditioned. Correlatively, he holds that 
the constitutions of particular existents must be described so as to exhibit 



From Descartes To Kant 147 

their 'capacities' for being conditioned by such 'powers' in other particulars. 
He also holds that all qualities have in some sense a relational element in 
them. Perhaps, though Locke does not say so, this notion of the relational 
element in qualities is illustrated in the following passage: "Besides, there 
is scarce any particular thing existing, which, in some of its simple ideas, 
does not communicate with a greater, and in others with a less, number of 
particular beings: . . ." 2 Locke here expresses the notion of an identity be- 
tween two simple ideas in the form of a 'communication' between the par- 
ticular existents which possess that common quality. This passage also 
illustrates Locke's habit of employing the term 'idea't in a sense other than 
particular content of an act of awareness. Finally, Locke's notion of the 
passage of time is that something is 'perpetually perishing/ If he had 
grasped the notion that the actual entity 'perishes' in the passage of time, 
so that no actual entity changes, he would have arrived [223] at the point 
of view of the philosophy of organism. What he does say, is "perpetually 
perishing parts of succession." 3 Here, as elsewhere, Locke's neglect of 
ultimate questions revenges itself upon him. Nothing can make the var- 
ious parts of his Essay mutually consistent. He never revises the sub- 
stance-quality categories which remain presupposed throughout his Essay. 
In the first two books of the Essay , he professes to lay the foundations of 
his doctrine of ideas. These books are implicitly dominated by the notion 
of the ideas as mere qualifications of the substrate mind. In the third book 
of the Essay he is apparently passing on to the application of his estab- 
lished doctrine of ideas to the subordinate question of the function of 
language. But he tacitly introduces a new doctrine of ideas, which is dif- 
ficult to conciliate with the sensationalist doctrine of the preceding books. 
Hume concentrates upon the doctrine of Locke's earlier books; the phi- 
losophy of organism concentrates upon that of the later books in the Essay. 
If Locke's Essay is to be interpreted as a consistent scheme of thought, un- 
doubtedly Hume is right; but such an interpretation offers violence to 
Locke's contribution to philosophy. 

SECTION III 

In the philosophy of organism it is assumed that an actual entity is 
composite. 'Actuality* is the fundamental exemplification of composition; 
all other meanings of 'composition' are referent to this root-meaning. But 
'actuality' is a general term, which merely indicates this ultimate type of 
composite unity: there are many composite unities to which this general 
term applies. There is no general fact of composition, not expressible in 
terms of the composite constitutions of the individual occasions. Every 
proposition is entertained in the constitution of some one actual entity, or 
severally in the constitutions of many actual entities. This is only [224] 

* Essay, III, IX, 14. 
3 II, XIV, 1. 



148 Discussions and Applications 

another rendering of the 'ontological principle/ It follows from the on- 
tological principle, thus interpreted, that the notion of a 'common world' 
must find its exemplification in the constitution of each actual entity, taken 
by itself for analysis. For an actual entity cannot be a member of a 'com- 
mon world/ except in the sense that the 'common world' is a constituent 
of its own constitution. It follows that every item of the universe, includ- 
ing all the other actual entities, is a constituentt in the constitution of any 
one actual entity. This conclusion has already been employed under the 
title of the principle of relativity/ This principle of relativity is the axiom 
by which the ontological principle is rescued from issuing in an extreme 
monism. Hume adumbrates this principle in his notion of 'repetition/ 

Some principle is now required to rescue actual entities from being 
undifferentiated repetitions, each of the other, with mere numerical di- 
versity. This requisite is supplied by the 'principle of intensive relevance/ 
The notion of intensive relevance is fundamental for the meaning of such 
concepts as 'alternative possibilities/ 'more or less/ 'important or negli- 
gible. 7 The principle asserts that any item of the universe, however pre- 
posterous as an abstract thought, or however remote as an actual entity, 
has its own gradation of relevance, as prehended, in the constitution of any 
one actual entity: it might have had more relevance: and it might have had 
less relevance, including the zero of relevance involved in the negative 
prehension; but in fact it has just that relevance whereby it finds its 
status in the constitution of that actual entity. It will be remembered that 
Hume finds it necessary to introduce the notion of variations in 'force and 
vivacity/ He is here making a particular application— and, as I believe, an 
unsuccessful application— of the general principle of intensive relevance. 

There is interconnection between the degrees of relevance of different 
items in the same actual entity. This fact of interconnection is asserted in 
the 'principle of \225] compatibility and contrariety/ There are items 
which, in certain respective gradations of relevance, are contraries to each 
other; so that those items, with their respective intensities of relevance, 
cannot coexist in the constitution of one actual entity. If some group of 
items, with their variety of relevance, can coexist in one actual entity, then 
the group, as thus variously relevant, is a compatible group. The various 
specific essences of one genus, whereby an actual entity may belong to one 
or other of the species but cannot belong to more than one, illustrate the 
incompatibility between two groups of items. Also in so far as a specific 
essence is complex, the specific essence is necessarily composed of com- 
patible items, if there has been any exemplification of that species. But 
'feelings' are the entities which are primarily 'compatible 7 or 'incom- 
patible/ All other usages of these terms are derivative. 

The words 'real' and 'potential 7 are, in this exposition, taken in senses 
which are antithetical. In their primary senses, they qualify the 'eternal 
objects/ These eternal objects determine how the world of actual entities 
enters into the constitution of each one of its members via its feelings. 



From Descartes To Kant 149 

And they also express how the constitution of any one actual entity is 
analysable into phases, related as presupposed and presupposing. Eternal 
objects express how the predecessor-phase is absorbed into the successor- 
phaset without limitation of itself, but with additions necessary for the 
determination of an actual unity in the form of individual satisfaction. The 
actual entities enter into each others' constitutions under limitations im- 
posed by incompatibilities 4 of feelings. Such incompatibilities relegate 
various elements in the constitutions of felt objects to the intensive zero, 
which is termed 'irrelevance/ The preceding phases enter into their succes- 
sors with additions which eliminate the inde- [226] terminations. The how 
of the limitations, and the how of the additions, are alike the realization of 
eternal objects in the constitution of the actual entity in question. An 
eternal object in abstraction from any one particular actual entity is a 
potentiality for ingression into actual entities. In its ingression into any 
one actual entity, either as relev9.it or as irrelevant, it retains its poten- 
tiality of indefinite diversity of modes of ingression, a potential indeter- 
mination rendered determinate in this instance. The definite ingression 
into a particular actual entity is not to be conceived as the sheer evocation 
of that eternal object from 'not-being' into 'being'; it is the evocation of 
determination out of indetermination. Potentiality becomes reality; and 
yet retains its message of alternatives which the actual entity has avoided. 
In the constitution of an actual entity: —what ever component is red, might 
have been green; and whatever component is loved, might have been 
coldly esteemed. The term 'universal' is unfortunate in its application to 
eternal objects; for it seems to deny, and in fact it was meant to deny, that 
the actual entities also fall within the scope of the principle of relativity. 
If the term 'eternal objects' is disliked, the term 'potentials' would be 
suitable. The eternal objects are the pure potentials of the universe; and 
the actual entities differ from each other in their realization of potentials. 
Locke's term 'idea,' in his primary use of it in the first two books of the 
Essay, means the determinate ingression of an eternal object into the ac- 
tual entity in question. But he also introduces the limitation t to conscious 
mentality, which is here abandoned. 

Thus in the philosophy of organism, Locke's first use of the term 'idea' 
is covered by the doctrine of the 'ingression 7 of eternal objects into actual 
entities; and his second use of the same term is covered by the doctrine of 
the 'objectification' of actual entities. The two doctrines cannot be ex- 
plained apart from each other: they constitute explanations of the two 
fundamental principles— [227] the ontological principle and the principle 
of relativity. 

The four stages constitutive of an actual entity have been stated above 
in Part II, Chapter III, Section I. They can be named, datum, process, 

4 Dr. H. M. Sheffer has pointed out the fundamental logical importance of the 
notion of 'incompatibility'; cf. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.,f Vol. XIV, pp. 481- 
488; and Introduction to Vol. 1 of Principia Mathematica (2nd edition). 



150 Discussions and Applications 

satisfaction, decision. The two terminal stages have to do with 'becoming' 
in the sense of the transition from the settled actual world to the new- 
actual entity relatively to which that settlement is defined. But such 
'definition* must be found as an element in the actual entities concerned. 
The 'settlement' which an actual entity 'finds' is its datum. It is to be con- 
ceived as a limited perspective of the 'settled' world provided by the 
eternal objects concerned. This datum is 'decided' by the settled world. 
It is 'prehended' by the new superseding entity. The datum is the ob- 
jective content of the experience. The decision, providing the datum, is a 
transference of self-limited appetition; the settled world provides the 'real 
potentiality' that its many actualities be felt compatibly; and the new 
concrescence starts from this datum. The perspective is provided by the 
elimination of incompatibilities. The final stage, the 'decision/ is how the 
actual entity, having attained its individual 'satisfaction/ thereby adds a 
determinate condition to the settlement for the future beyond itself. Thus 
the 'datum' is the 'decision received/ and the 'decision' is the 'decision 
transmitted/ Between these two decisions, received and transmitted, there 
lie the two stages, 'process 7 and 'satisfaction.' The datum is indeterminate 
as regards the final satisfaction. The 'process' is the addition of those ele- 
ments of feeling whereby these indeterminations are dissolved into de- 
terminate linkages attaining the actual unity of an individual actual entity. 
The actual entity, in becoming itself, also solves the question as to what 
it is to be. Thus process is the stage in which the creative idea works 
towards the definition and attainment of a determinate individuality. 
Process is the growth and attainment of a final end. The progressive defini- 
[228] tion of the final end is the efficacious condition for its attainment. 
The determinate unity of an actual entity is bound together by the final 
causation towards an ideal progressively defined by its progressive relation 
to the determinations and indeterminations of the datum. The ideal, itself 
felt, defines what 'self shall arise from the datum; and the ideal is also 
an element in the self which thus arises. 

According to this account, efficient causation expresses the transition 
from actual entity to actual entity; and final causation expresses the in- 
ternal process whereby the actual entity becomes itself. There is the be- 
coming of the datum, which is to be found in the past of the world; and 
there is the becoming of the immediate self from the datum. This latter 
becoming is the immediate actual process. An actual entity is at once the 
product of the efficient past, and is also, in Spinoza's phrase, causa sui. 
Every philosophy recognizes, in some form or other, this factor of self- 
causation, in what it takes to be ultimate actual fact. Spinoza's words have 
already been quoted. Descartes' argument, from the very fact of thinking, 
assumes that this freely determined operation is thereby constitutive of an 
occasion in the endurance of an actual entity. He writes (Meditation II) : 
"I am, I exist, is necessarily true each time that I pronounce it, or that I 



From Descartes To Kant 151 

mentally conceive it." Descartes in his own philosophy conceives the 
thinker as creating the occasional thought. The philosophy of organism 
inverts the order, and conceives the thought as a constituent operation in 
the creation of the occasional thinker. The thinker is the final end whereby 
there is the thought. In this inversion we have the final contrast between a 
philosophy of substance and a philosophy of organism. The operations of 
an organism are directed towards the organism as a 'superject/ and are not 
directed from the organism as a 'subject/ The operations are directed from 
antecedent organisms and to the immediate organism. They are Vectors/ 
in that they convey the many [229] things into the constitution of the 
single super ject. The creative process is rhythmic: it swings from the 
publicity of many things to the individual privacy; and it swings back from 
the private individual to the publicity of the objectified individual. The 
former swing is dominated by the final cause, which is the ideal; and the 
latter swing is dominated by the efficient cause, t which is actual. 

SECTION IV 

From the point of view of the philosophy of organism, the credit must 
be given to Hume that he emphasized the 'process' inherent in the fact of 
being a mind. His analysis of that process is faulty in its details. It was 
bound to be so; because, with Locke, he misconceived his problem to be 
the analysis of mental operations. He should have conceived it as the anal- 
ysis of operations constituent of actual entities. He would then have 
found mental operations in their proper place. Kant followed Hume in 
this misconception; and was thus led to balance the world upon thought- 
oblivious to the scanty supply of thinking. But Hume, Kant, and the 
philosophy of organism agree that the task of the critical reason is the 
analysis of constructs; and 'construction' is 'process/ Hume's analysis of 
the construct which constitutes a mental occasion is: impressions of sen- 
sation, ideas of impressions of sensation, impressions of reflection, ideas of 
impressions of reflection. This analysis may be found obscurely in Locke. 
But Hume exhibits it as an orderly process; and then endeavours— and 
fails— to express in terms of it our ordinary beliefs, in which he shares. 

For subsequent empiricists the pleasure of the dogma has overcome the 
metaphysical rule of evidence: that we must bow to those presumptions, 
which, in despite of criticism, we still employ for the regulation of our 
lives. Such presumptions are imperative in experience. Rationalism is 
the search for the coherence of such presumptions. Hume, in his series of 
ideas and of impressions, derivates from impressions of sensation, im- 
plicitly allows \230) that the building-up of experience is a process of addi- 
tion to original data. The philosophy of organism, in this respect, agrees with 
Hume. It disagrees with Hume as to the proper characterization of the 
primary data. In Hume's philosophy the primary impressions are char- 
acterized in terms of universals, e.g., in the first section of his Treatise he 



152 Discussions and Applications 

refers to the colour 'red 7 as an illustration. This is also the doctrine of the 
first two books of Locke's Essay. But in Locke's third book a different 
doctrine appears, and the primary data are explicitly said to be 'ideas of 
particular existents.' According to Locke's second doctrine, the ideas of 
universals are derived from these primary data by a process of comparison 
and analysis. The philosophy of organism agrees in principle with this 
second doctrine of Locke's. It is difficult, and trifling, to determine the 
exact extent of the agreement; because the expositions of Locke and Hume 
bring in the very derivative operations involving consciousness. The or- 
ganic philosophy does not hold that the 'particular existents' are prehended 
apart from universals; on the contrary, it holds that they are prehended by 
the mediation of universals. In other words, each actuality is prehended 
by means of some element of its own definiteness. This is the doctrine of 
the 'objectification' of actual entities. Thus the primary stage in the con- 
crescence of an actual entity is the way in which the antecedent universe 
enters into the constitution of the entity in question, so as to constitute the 
basis of its nascent individuality. A converse way of looking at this truth is 
that the relevance to other actual entities of its own status in the actual 
world t is the initial datum in the process of its concrescence. When it is 
desired to emphasize this interpretation of the datum, the phrase 'objec- 
tive content' will be used synonymously with the term 'datum. 7 Of course, 
strictly speaking, the universals, to which Hume confines the datum, are 
also 'objects'; but the phrase 'objective content' is meant to emphasize the 
doctrine of 'objectificarion' of actual entities. If experi- \231] ence be not 
based upon an objective content, there can be no escape from a solipsist 
subjectivism. But Hume, and Locke in his main doctrine, fail to provide 
experience with any objective content. Kant, fort whom 'process' is 
mainly a process of thought, accepts Hume's doctrine as to the 'datum' 
and turns the 'apparent' objective content into the end of the construct. 
So far, Kant's 'apparent' objective content seems to take the place of the 
'satisfaction' in the philosophy of organism. In this way there can be no 
real escape from the solipsist difficulty. But Kant in his appeal to 'practical 
reason' admits also the 'satisfaction' in a sense analogous to that in the 
philosophy of organism; and by an analysis of its complex character he 
arrives at ultimate actualities which, according to his account, cannot be 
discovered by any analysis of 'mere appearance.' This is a very complex 
doctrine, which has been reproduced in all philosophies derivative from 
Kant. The doctrine gives each actual entity two worlds, one world of mere 
appearance, and the other world compact of ultimate substantial fact. On 
this point, as to the absence of 'objective content' in the datum for ex- 
perience, Santayana 5 seems to agree with Hume and Kant. But if his in- 
troduction of 'animal faith' is to be taken as a re-examination of the datum 
under the influence of the sceptical conclusion from Hume's doctrine, then 
5 Cf . Scepticism and Animal Faith. 



From Descartes To Kant 153 

he, as his second doctrine, is practically reasserting Locke's second doc- 
trine. But if he is appealing to 'practice' away from the critical examina- 
tion of our sources of information, he must be classed with Hume and 
Kant, although differing from them in every detail of procedure. 

In view of the anti-rationalism of Hume's contented appeal to 'practice/ 
it is very difficult to understand— except as another example of anti-ra- 
tionalism— the strong objection, entertained by Hume and by his 'em- 
piricist' followers, to the anti-rationalistic basis of some forms of religious 
faith. This strain of anti-rationalism [232] which Locke and Hume ex- 
plicitly introduced into philosophy marks the final triumph of the anti- 
rationalistic reaction against the rationalism of the Middle Ages. Ration- 
alism is the belief that clarity can only be reached by pushing explanation 
to its utmost limits. Locke, who hoped to attain final clarity in his analysis 
of human understanding in divorce from metaphysics, was, so far, an anti- 
rationalist. But Hume, in so far as he is to be construed as remaining con- 
tent with two uncoordinated sets of beliefs, one based on the critical ex- 
amination of our sources of knowledge, and the other on the uncritical + 
examination of beliefs involved in 'practice,' reaches the high watermark 
of anti-rationalism in philosophy; for 'explanation' is the analysis of 
coordination. 

SECTION V 

The process whereby an actual entity, starting from its objective con- 
tent, attains its individual satisfaction, will be more particularly analysed 
in Part III. The primary character of this process is that it is individual to 
the actual entity; it expresses how the datum, which involves the actual 
world, becomes a component in the one actual entity. There must there- 
fore be no further reference to other actual entities; the elements available 
for the explanation are simply, the objective content, eternal objects, and 
the selective concrescence of feelings whereby an actual entity becomes 
itself. It must be remembered that the objective content is analysable into 
actual entities under limited perspectives provided by their own natures: 
these limited perspectives involve eternal objects in grades of relevance. If 
the 'process' were primarily a process of understanding, we should have to 
note that 'grades of relevance' are only other eternal objects in grades of 
relevance, and so on indefinitely. But we have not the sort of understand- 
ings which embrace such indefinite progressions. Accordingly there is here 
a vicious regress, if the process be essentially a process of understanding. 
But this is not the primary [233] description of it; the process is a process 
of 'feeling.' In feeling, what is felt is not necessarily analysed; in under- 
standing, what is understood is analysed, in so far as it is understood. Un- 
derstanding is a special form of feeling. Thus there is no vicious regress in 
feeling, by reason of the indefinite complexity of what is felt. Kant, in his 



154 Discussions and Applications 

'Transcendental Aesthetic/ 1 emphasizes the doctrine that in intuition a 
complex datum is intuited as one. 

Again the selection involved in the phrase 'selective concrescence* is not 
a selection among the components of the objective content; for, by hy- 
pothesis, the objective content is a datum. The compatibilities and in- 
compatibilities which impose the perspective, transforming the actual 
world into the datum, are inherent in the nature of things. Thus the 
selection is a selection of relevant eternal objects whereby what is a 
datum from without is transformed into its complete determination as a 
fact within. The problem whicht the concrescence solves is, how the many 
components of the objective content are to be unified in one felt content 
with its complex subjective form. This one felt content is the 'satisfaction/ 
whereby the actual entity is its particular individual self; to use Descartes' 
phrase, 'requiring nothing but itself in order to exist/ In the conception of 
the actual entity in its phase of satisfaction, the entity has attained its in- 
dividual separation from other things; it has absorbed the datum, and it 
has not yet lost itself in the swing back to the 'decision' whereby its ap- 
petition becomes an element in the data of other entities superseding it. 
Time has stood still—if only it could. 

Thus process is the admission of eternal objects in their new role of 
investing the datum with the individuality of the subject. The datum,* 
quat mere datum, includes the many individualities of the actual world. 
The satisfaction includes these many individualities as subordinate con- 
tributors to the one individuality. The process admits or rejects t eternal 
objects which by their absorption into the subjective forms of the many 
feelings [234] effect this integration. The attainment of satisfaction rele- 
gates all eternal objects which are not 'felt' either as determinants of 
definiteness in the data,t or as determinants of definiteness in the subjective 
form of the satisfaction, into the status of contraries to the eternal objects 
which are thus felt. Thus all indeterminations respecting the potentialities 
of the universe are definitely solved so far as concerns the satisfaction of 
the subject in question. 

The process can be analysed genetically into a series of subordinate 
phases which presuppose their antecedents. Neither the intermediate 
phases, nor the datum which is the primary phase of all, determine the 
final phase of determinate individualization. Thus an actual entity, on its 
^subjective side, is nothing else than what the universe is for it, including 
its own reactions. The reactions are the subjective forms of the feelings, 
elaborated into definiteness through stages of process. An actual entity 
achieves its own unity by its determinate feelings respecting every item of 
the datum. Every individual objectification in the datum has its perspec- 
tive defined by its own eternal objects with their own relevance compatible 
with the relevance of other objectifications. Each such objectification, and 
each such complex of objectifications, in the datum is met with a corre- 
spondent feeling, with its determinate subjective form, until the many 



From Descartes To Kant 155 

become one experience, the satisfaction. The philosophies of substance 
presuppose a subject which then encounters a datum, and then reacts to 
the datum. The philosophy of organism presupposes a datum which is met 
with feelings, and progressively attains the unity of a subject. But with 
this doctrine, 'superject' would be a better term than 'subject/ Locke's 
'ideas of reflection' are the feelings, in so far as they have entered into 
consciousness. 

It is by reference to feelings that the notion of 'immediacy' obtains its 
meaning. The mere objectification of actual entities by eternal objects 
lacks 'immediacy/ It is 'repetition'; and this is a contrary to 'immediacy.' 
[235] But 'process' is the rush of feelings whereby second-handedness at- 
tains subjective immediacy; in this way, subjective form overwhelms repe- 
tition, and transforms it into immediately felt satisfaction; objectivity is 
absorbed into subjectivity. It is useful to compare this analysis of the 
construction of an act of experience with Kant's. In the first place Kant's 
act of experience is essentially knowledge. Thus whatever is not knowledge 
is necessarily inchoate, and merely on its way to knowledge. In comparing 
Kant's procedure with that of the philosophy of organism, it must be 
remembered that an 'apparent' objective content is the end of Kant's 
process, and thus takes the place of 'satisfaction' in the process as analysed 
in the philosophy of organism. In Kant's phraseology at the beginning of 
the Critique of Pure Reason, this 'apparent' objective content is referred to 
as 'objects.' He also accepts Hume's sensationalist account of the datum. 
Kant places this sentence at the commencement of the Critique: "Objects 
therefore are given to us through our sensibility. Sensibility alone supplies 
us with intuitions. These intuitions become thought through the under- 
standing, and hence arise conceptions." 6 This is expanded later in a form 
which makes Kant's adhesion to Hume's doctrine of the datum more 
explicit: 

And here we see that the impressions of the senses give the first im- 
pulse to the whole faculty of knowledge with respect to them, and 
thus produce experience which consists of two very heterogeneous 
elements, namely, matter for knowledge, derived from the senses \eine 
Materiel zur Erkenntniss aus den Sinnen] f and a certain form accord- 
ing to which it is arranged, derived from the internal source of pure 
intuition and pure thought, first brought into action by the former, 
and then producing concepts. 7 
Also: 

Thoughts with- [236] out content are empty, intuitions without con- 
cepts are blind. 8 

6 "Vermittelst der Sinnlichkeit also werden uns Gegenstande gegeben, und sic 
allein liefert uns Anschauungenjf durch den Verstand aber werden sie gedacht, 
und von ihm entspringen BegrirTe." Translation in the text is Max Muller's. 

7 Transcendental Analytic,' f Ch. II, Sect. I (Max Muller). 

8 'Transcendental Logic,' Introduction, Sect. L* 



156 Discussions and Applications 

In this last statement the philosophy of organism is in agreement with 
Kant; but for a different reason. It is agreed that the functioning of 
concepts is an essential factor in knowledge, so that 'intuitions without 
concepts are blind/ But for Kant, apart from concepts there is nothing to 
know; since objects related in a knowable world are the product of con- 
ceptual functioning whereby categoreal form is introduced into the sense- 
datum, which otherwise is intuited in the form of a mere spatio-temporal 
flux of sensations. Knowledge requires that this mere flux be particularized 
by conceptual functioning, whereby the flux is understood as a nexus of 
'objects/ Thus for Kant the process whereby there is experience is a 
process from subjectivity to apparent objectivity. The philosophy of or- 
ganism inverts this analysis, and explains the process as proceeding from 
objectivity to subjectivity, namely, from the objectivity, whereby the ex- 
ternal world is a datum, to the subjectivity, whereby there is one in- 
dividual experience. Thus, according to the philosophy of organism, in 
every act of experience there are objects for knowledge; but, apart from 
the inclusion of intellectual functioning in that act of experience, there is 
no knowledge. 

We have now come to Kant, the great philosopher who first, fully and 
explicitly, introduced into philosophy the conception of an act of ex- 
perience as a constructive functioning, transforming subjectivity into ob- 
jectivity 7 , or objectivity into subjectivity; the order is immaterial in com- 
parison with the general idea. We find the first beginnings of the notion in 
Locke and in Hume. Indeed, in Locke, the process is conceived in its 
correct order, at least in the view of the philosophy of organism. But the 
whole notion is only vaguely and inadequately conceived. The full sweep 
of the notion is due to Kant. The second half of the modern period of 
philosophical thought is to be dated from Hume and Kant. In it the [237] 
development of cosmology has been hampered by the stress laid upon one, 
or other, of three misconceptions: 

(i) The substance-quality doctrine of actuality. 

(ii) The sensationalist doctrine of perception. 

(iii) The Kantian doctrine of the objective world as a construct from 
subjective experience. 

The combined influence of these allied errors has been to reduce philos- 
ophy to a negligible influence in the formation of contemporary modes 
of thought. Hume himself introduces the ominous appeal to 'practice- 
not in criticism of his premises, but in supplement to his conclusions. 
Bradley, who repudiates Hume, finds the objective world in which we live, 
and move, and have our being, 'inconsistent if taken as real/ Neither side 
conciliates philosophical conceptions of a real world with the world of 
daily experience. 



CHAPTER VII 
THE SUBJECTIVIST PRINCIPLE 

SECTION I 

[238] It is impossible to scrutinize too carefully the character to be as- 
signed to the datum in the act of experience. The whole philosophical 
system depends on it. Hume's doctrine of 'impressions of sensation' (Trea- 
tise, Book I, Part I, Sect. II) is twofold. I will call one part of his doctrine 
'The Subjectivist Principle' and the other part 'The Sensationalist Prin- 
ciple/ It is usual to combine the two under the heading of the 'sensation- 
alist doctrine'; but two principles are really involved, and many philos- 
ophers—Locke, for instance— are not equally consistent in their adhesion 
to both of them. The philosophy of organism denies both of these doc- 
trines, in the form in which they are considered in this chapter, though it 
accepts a reformed subjectivist principle (cf. Sect. Vf below and Part II, 
Ch. IX). Locke accepted the sensationalist principle, and was inconsistent 
in his statements respecting the subjectivist principle. With the exception 
of some lapses, he accepted the latter in the first two books of his Essay, 
and rejected it tacitly, but persistently, in the third and fourth books. 
Kant (in the Critique of Pure Reason) accepted the subjectivist principle, 
and rejected the sensationalist principle. 

The sensationalist principle acquires dominating importance, if the 
subjectivist principle be accepted. Kant's realization of this importance 
constituted the basis of his contribution to philosophy. The history of 
modern philosophy is the story of attempts to evade the inflexible con- 
sequences of the subjectivist principle, explicitly or implicitly accepted. 
The great merit of Hume and of [239] Kant is the explicitness with which 
they faced the difficulty. 

The subjectivist principle is, that the datum in the act of experience can 
be adequately analysed purely in terms of universals. 

The sensationalist principle is, that the primary activity in the act of 
experience is the bare subjective entertainment of the datum, devoid of 
any subjective form of reception. This is the doctrine of mere sensation. 

The subjectivist principle follows from three premises: (i) The ac- 
ceptance of the 'substance-quality' concept as expressing the ultimate on- 
tological principle, (ii) The acceptance of Aristotle's definition of a pri- 
mary substance, as always a subject and never a predicate, (in) The 
assumption that the experient subject is a primary substance. The first 
premise states that the final metaphysical fact is always to be expressed as 

157 



158 Discussions and Applications 

a quality inhering in a substance. The second premise divides qualities and 
primary substances into two mutually exclusive classes. The two premises 
together are the foundation of the traditional distinction between uni- 
versal and particulars. The philosophy of organism denies the premises on 
which this distinction is founded. It admits two ultimate classes of entities, 
mutually exclusive. One class consists of 'actual entities/ which in the 
philosophical tradition are mis-described as 'particulars'; and the other 
class consists of forms of definiteness, here named 'eternal objects/ which 
in comparison with actual entities are mis-described as 'universals.' These 
mis-descriptions have already been considered (Part II, Ch. I, Sect. V). 

Descartes held, with some flashes of inconsistency arising from the use 
of 'realitas objectiva/ the subjectivist principle as to the datum. But he 
also held that this mitigation of the subjeetivist* principle enabled the 
'process' within experience to include a sound argument for the existence 
of God; and thence a sound argument for the general veridical character of 
those presumptions [240] as to the external world which somehow arise 
in the process. 

According to the philosophy of organism, it is only by the introduction 
of covert inconsistencies into the subjectivist principle, as here stated, that 
there can be any escape from what Santayana calls, 'solipsism of the pres- 
ent moment/ Thus Descartes' mode of escape is either illusory, or its 
premises are incompletely stated. This covert introduction is always arising 
because common sense is inflexibly objectivist. We perceive other things 
which are in the world of actualities in the same sense as we are. Also our 
emotions are directed towards other things, including of course our bodily 
organs. These are our primary beliefs which philosophers proceed to 
dissect. 

Now philosophy has always proceeded on the sound principle that its 
generalizations f must be based upon the primary elements in actual ex- 
perience as starting-points. Greek philosophy had recourse to the common 
forms of language to suggest its generalizations. It found the typical state- 
ment, 'That stone is grey'; and it evolved the generalization that the actual 
world can be conceived as a collection of primary substances qualified by 
universal qualities. Of course, this was not the only generalization evolved: 
Greek philosophy was subtle and multiform, also it was not inflexibly 
consistent. But this general notion was always influencing thought, ex- 
plicitly or implicitly. 

A theory of knowledge was also needed. Again philosophy started on a 
sound principle, that all knowledge is grounded on perception. Perception 
was then analysed, and found to be the awareness that a universal quality 
is qualifying a particular substance. Thus perception is the catching of a 
universal quality in the act of qualifying a particular substance. It was 
then asked, how the perceiver perceives; and the answer is,t by his organs 
of sensation. Thus the universal qualities which qualify the perceived 
substances are, in respect to the [24 1] perceiver, his private sensations re- 



The Subjectivist Principle 159 

ferred to particular substances other than himself. So far, the tradition of 
philosophy includes, among other elements, a factor of extreme ob- 
jectivism in metaphysics, whereby the subject-predicate form of proposition 
is taken as expressing a fundamental metaphysical truth. Descartes modi- 
fied traditional philosophy in two opposite ways. He increased the meta- 
physical emphasis on the substance-quality forms of thought. The actual 
things 'required nothing but themselves in order to exist/ and were to be 
thought of in terms of their qualities, some of them essential attributes, 
and others accidental modes. He also laid down the principle, that those 
substances which are the subjects enjoying conscious experiences t provide 
the primary data for philosophy, namely, themselves as in the enjoyment 
of such experience. This is the famous subjectivist bias which entered into 
modern philosophy through Descartes. In this doctrine Descartes undoubt- 
edly made the greatest philosophical discovery since the age of Plato and 
Aristotle. For his doctrine directly traversed the notion that the proposi- 
tion, 'This stone is grey/ expresses a primary form of known fact from 
which metaphysics can start its generalizations. If we are to go back to the 
subjective enjoyment of experience, the type of primary starting-point is 
'my perception of this stone as grey.' Primitive men were not metaphysi- 
cians, nor were they interested in the expression of concrete experience. 
Their language merely expressed useful abstractions, such as 'greyness of 
the stone/ But like Columbus who never visited America, Descartes missed 
the full sweep of his own discovery, and he and his successors, Locke and 
Hume, continued to construe the functionings of the subjective enjoyment 
of experience according to the substance-quality categories. Yet if the 
enjoyment of experience be the constitutive subjective fact, these cate- 
gories have lost all claim to any fundamental character in metaphysics. 
Hume — to proceed at once to the consistent exponent of the method- 
looked for a [242] universal quality to function as qualifying the mind, by 
way of explanation of its perceptive enjoyment. Now if we scan 'my per- 
ception of this stone as grey' in order to find a universal, the only available 
candidate is 'greyness/ Accordingly for Hume, 'greyness/ functioning as a 
sensation qualifying the mind, is a fundamental type of fact for meta- 
physical generalization. The result is Hume's simple impressions of sensa- 
tion, which form the starting-point of his philosophy. But this is an entire 
muddle, f for the perceiving mind is not grey, and so grey is now made to 
perform a new role. From the original fact 'my perception of this stone as 
grey/ Hume extracts 'Awareness of sensation of greyness'; and puts it 
forward as the ultimate datum in this element of experience. 

He has discarded the objective actuality of the stone-image in his search 
for a universal quality: this 'objective actuality' is Descartes' 'realitas ob- 
jective! \ Hume's search was undertaken in obedience to a metaphysical 
principle which had lost all claim to validity, if the Cartesian discovery be 
accepted. He is then content with 'sensation of greyness/ which is just as 
much a particular as the original stone-image. He is aware of 'this sensa- 



160 Discussions and Applications 

tion of greyness.' What he has done is to assert arbitrarily the 'subjectivism 
and 'sensationalist' principles as applying to the datum for experience: the 
notion 'this sensation of greyness' has no reference to any other actual 
entity. Hume thus applies to the experiencing subject Descartes' principle, 
that it requires no other actual entity in order to exist. The fact that fi- 
nally Hume criticizes the Cartesian notion of mindt does not alter the 
other fact that his antecedent arguments presuppose that notion. 

It is to be noticed that Hume can only analyse the sensation in terms of 
af universal and of its realization in the prehending mind. For example, 
to take the first examples which in his Treatise he gives of such analysis, we 
find 'red/ 'scarlet/ 'orange/ 'sweet/ 'bitter/ Thus Hume describes 'im- 
pressions of sensation' in the exact terms in which the philosophy of or- 
ganism describes con- [243] ceptual feelings. They are the particular feel- 
ings of universals, and are not feelings of other particular existents ex- 
emplifying universals. Hume admits this identification, and can find no 
distinction except in 'force and vivacity/ He writes: "The first circum- 
stance that strikes my eye, is the great resemblance between our impres- 
sions and ideas in every particular except their degree of force and 
vivacity/'* 

In contrast to Hume, the philosophy of organism keeps 'this stone as 
grey' in the datum for the experience in question. It is, in fact, the 'objec- 
tive datum' of a certain physical feeling, belonging to a derivative type in 
a late phase of a concrescence. But this doctrine fully accepts Descartes' 
discovery that subjective experiencing is the primary metaphysical situa- 
tion which is presented to metaphysics for analysis. This doctrine is the 
'reformed subjectivist principle,' t mentioned earlier in this chapter. Ac- 
cordingly, the notion 'this stone as grey' is a derivative abstraction, neces- 
sary indeed as an element in the description of the fundamental experien- 
tial feeling, but delusive as a metaphysical starting-point. This derivative 
abstraction is called an 'objectification/ 

The justification for this procedure is, first, common sense, and, sec- 
ondly, the avoidance of the difficulties which have dogged the subjectivist 
and sensationalist principles of modern philosophy. Descartes' discovery 
on the side of subjectivism requires balancing by an 'objectivist' principle 
as to the datum for experience. Also, with the advent of Cartesian subjec- 
tivism, the substance-quality category has lost all claim to metaphysical 
primacy; and, with this disposition of substance-quality, we can reject the 
notion of individual substances, each with its private world of qualities 
and sensations. 

SECTION II 

In the philosophy of organism knowledge is relegated to the intermedi- 
ate phase of j&gt;rocess. Cognizance belongs to the genus of subjective forms 
which are admitted, or [244] not admitted, to the function of absorbing 
the objective content into the subjectivity of satisfaction. Its 'importance' 



The Subjectivist Principle 161 

is therefore no necessary element in the concrete actual entity. In the case 
of any one such entity, it may merely constitute an instance of what 
Locke terms 'a capacity/ If we are considering the society of successive 
actual occasions in the historic route forming the life of an enduring ob- 
ject, some of the earlier actual occasions may be without knowledge, and 
some of the later may possess knowledge. In such a case, the unknowing 
man has become knowing. There is nothing surprising in this conclusion; 
it happens daily for most of us, when we sleep at night and wake in the 
morning. Every actual entity has the capacity for knowledge, and there is 
graduation in the intensity of various items of knowledge; but, in gen- 
eral, knowledge seems to be negligible apart from a peculiar complexity in 
the constitution of some actual occasion. 

We— as enduring objects with personal order— objectify the occasions of 
our own past with peculiar completeness in our immediate present. We 
find in those occasions, as known from our present standpoint, a surprising 
variation in the range and intensity of our realized knowledge. We sleep; 
we are half-awake; we are aware of our perceptions, but are devoid of 
generalities in thought; we are vividly absorbed within a small region of 
abstract though while oblivious to the world around; we are attending to 
our emotions— some torrent of passion— to them and to nothing else; we 
are morbidly discursive in the width of our attention; and finally we sink 
back into temporary obliviousness, sleeping or stunned. Also we can re- 
member factors experienced in our immediate past, which at the time we 
failed to notice. When we survey the chequered history of our own capac- 
ity for knowledge, does common sense allow us to believe that the opera- 
tions of judgment, operations which require definition in terms of con- 
scious apprehension, are those operations which are foundational in exist- 
ence either as \245] an essential attribute for an actual entity, or as the 
final culmination whereby unity of experience is attained?! 

The general case x of conscious perception is the negative perception, 
namely, 'perceiving this stone as not grey/ The 'grey' then has ingression 
in its full character of a conceptual novelty, illustrating an alternative. In 
the positive case, 'perceiving this stone as grey/ the grey has ingression in 
its character of a possible novelty, but in fact by its conformity empha- 
sizing the dative grey, blindly felt. Consciousness is the feeling of nega- 
tion: in the perception of 'the stone as grey/ such feeling is in barest 
germ; in the perception of 'the stone as not grey/ such feeling is int full 
development. Thus the negative perception is the triumph of conscious- 
ness. It finally rises to the peak of free imagination, in which the con- 
ceptual novelties search through a universe in which they are not datively 
exemplified. 

Consciousness is the subjective form involved in feeling the contrast 
between the 'theory' which may be erroneous and the fact which is 'given/ 
Thus consciousness involves the rise into importance of the contrast be- 

1 Cf. Part III, for the full account. 



162 Discussions and Applications 

tween the eternal objects designated by the words 'any' and 'just that/ 
Conscious perception is ? therefore, the most primitive form of judgment. 
The organic philosophy holds that consciousness only arises in a Jate 
derivative phase of complex integrations. If an actual occasion be such 
that phases of this sort are negligible in its concrescence, then in its ex- 
perience there is no knowledge;! owing to the fact that consciousness is a 
subjective form belonging to the later phases, the prehensions which it 
directly irradiates are those of an 'impure' type. Consciousness only il- 
luminates the more primitive types of prehension so far as these prehen- 
sions are still elements in the products of integration. Thus those elements 
of our experience which stand out clearly and distinctly in our conscious- 
ness are not its basic facts; they are the derivative modifications which 
arise in the process. For [246] example, consciousness only dimly illumi- 
nates the prehensions in the mode of causal efficacy, because these pre- 
hensions are primitive elements in our experience. But prehensions in the 
mode of presentational immediacy are among those prehensions which we 
enjoy with the most vivid consciousness. These prehensions are late 
derivatives in the concrescence of an experient subject. The consequences 
of the neglect of this law, that the late derivative elements are more clearly 
illuminated by consciousness than the primitive elements, have been fatal 
to the proper analysis of an experient occasion. In fact, most of the diffi- 
culties of philosophy are produced by it. Experience has been explained in 
a thoroughly topsy-turvy fashion, the wrong end first. In particular, emo- 
tional and purposeful experience have been made to follow upon Hume's 
impressions of sensation. 

To sum up: (i) Consciousness is a subjective form arising in the higher 
phases of concrescence, (ii) Consciousness primarily illuminates the higher 
phase in which it arises, and only illuminates earlier phases derivatively, as 
they remain components in the higher phase, (iii) It follows that the 
order of dawning, clearly and distinctly, in consciousness is not the order 
of metaphysical priority. 

SECTION III 

The primitive form of physical experience is emotional— blind emo- 
tion—received as felt elsewhere in another occasion and conformally ap- 
propriated as a subjective passion. In the language appropriate to the 
higher stages of experience, the primitive element is sympathy, that is, 
feeling the feeling in another and feeling conformally with another. We 
are so used to considering the high abstraction, 'the stone as green/ that 
we have difficulty in eliciting into consciousness the notion of 'green' as 
the qualifying character of an emotion. Yet, the aesthetic feelings, whereby 
there is pictorial art, are nothing else than products of the contrasts [247] 
latent in a variety of colours qualifying emotion, contrasts which are made 
possible by their patterned relevance to each other. The separation of the 



The Subjectivist Principle 163 

emotional experience from the presentational intuition is a high abstrac- 
tion of thought. Thus the primitive experience is emotional feeling, f felt 
in its relevance to a world beyond. The feeling is blind and the relevance 
is vague. Also feeling, and reference to an exterior world, t pass into ap- 
petition, which is the feeling of determinate relevance to a world about to 
be. In the phraseology of physics, this primitive experience is 'vector 
feeling/ that is to say, feeling from a beyond which is determinate and 
pointing to a beyond which is to be determined. But the feeling is sub- 
jectively rooted in the immediacy of the present occasion: it is what the 
occasion feels for itself, as derived from the past and as merging into the 
future. In this vector transmission of primitive feeling the primitive pro- 
vision of width for contrast is secured by pulses of emotion, which in the 
coordinate division of occasions (cf. Part IV) appear as wave-lengths and 
vibrations. In any particular cosmic epoch, the order of nature has secured 
the necessary differentiation of function, so as to avoid incompatibilities, 
by shepherding the sensa characteristic of that epoch each into association 
with a definite pulse. Thus the transmission of each sensum is associated 
with its own wave-length. In physics, such transmission can be conceived 
as corpuscular or undulatory, according to the special importance of par- 
ticular features in the instance considered. The higher phases of experi- 
ence increase the dimension of width, and elicit contrasts of higher types. 
The clash of uncoordinated emotions in the lower categories isf avoided: 
the aspect of inhibition and of transitory satisfaction is diminished. Ex- 
perience realizes itself as an element in what is everlasting (cf. Part V, Ch. 
II), and as embodying in itself the everlasting component of the universe. 
This gain does not necessarily involve consciousness. Also it involves en- 
hanced subjective emphasis. The occasion [248] has become less of a detail 
and more of a totality, so far as its subjective experience is concerned. The 
feeling of this width, with its enhancement of permanence, takes the form 
of blind zest, which can become self-defeating by excess of subjective em- 
phasis. The inhibitions of zest by lack of adequate width to combine the 
contraries inherent in the environment lead to the destruction of the type 
of order concerned. Every increase of sensitivity requires an evolution 
towards adaptation. It must be remembered, however, that emotion in 
human experience, or even in animal experience, is not bare emotion. It 
is emotion interpreted, integrated, and transformed into higher categories 
of feeling. But even so, the emotional appetitive elements in our conscious 
experience are those which most closely resemble the basic elements of all 
physical experience. 

SECTION IV 

The distinction between the various stages of concrescence consists in 
the diverse modes of ingression of the eternal objects involved. The im- 
manent decision, whereby there is a supervening of stages in an actual 



164 Discussions and Applications 

entity, is always the determinant of a process of integration whereby com- 
pletion is arrived at— at least, such 'formal' completion as is proper to a 
single actual entity. This determination originates with conceptual pre- 
hensions which enter into integration with the physical prehensions,! 
modifying both the data and the subjective forms. 

The limitation whereby there is a perspective relegation of eternal ob- 
jects to the background is the characteristic of decision. Transcendent 
decision includes God's decision. He is the actual entity in virtue of which 
the entire multiplicity of eternal objects obtains its graded relevance to 
each stage of concrescence. Apart from God, there could be no relevant 
novelty. Whatever arises in actual entities from God's decision, arises first 
conceptually, and is transmuted into the physical world (cf. Part III). In 
'transcendent decision' there is transi- [249] tion from the past to the im- 
mediacy of the present; and in 'immanent decision' there is the process of 
acquisition of subjective form and the integration of feelings. In this 
process the creativity, universal throughout actuality, is characterized by 
the datum from the past; and it meets this dead datum— universalized 
into a character of creativity— by the vivifying novelty of subjective form 
selected from the multiplicity of pure potentiality. In the process, the old 
meets the new, and this meeting constitutes the satisfaction of an im- 
mediate particular individual. 

Eternal objects in any one of their modes of subjective ingrcssion are 
then functioning in the guise of subjective novelty meeting the objective 
datum from the past. This word 'feeling' is a mere technical term; but it 
has been chosen to suggest that functioning through which the con- 
crescent actuality appropriates the datum so as to make it its own. There 
are three successive phases of feelings, namely, a phase of 'conformal'f 
feelings, one of 'conceptual' feelings, and one of 'comparative' feelings, 
including 'propositional' feelings in this last species. In the conformal 
feelings the how of feeling reproduces what is felt. Some conformation is 
necessary as a basis of vector transition, whereby the past is synthesized 
with the present. The one eternal object in its two-way function, as a 
determinant of the datum and as a determinant of the subjective form, is 
thus relational. In this sense the solidarity of the universe is based on the 
relational functioning of eternal objects. The two latter? phases can be 
put together as the 'supplemental' phase. 

An eternal object when it has ingression through its function of ob- 
jectifying the actual world, so as to present the datum for prehension, is 
functioning 'datively.' Hence, to sum up, there are four modes of func- 
tioning whereby an eternal object has ingression into the constitution of 
an actual entity: (i) as dative ingression, (ii) in conformal physical feeling, 
(iii) in conceptual feeling, (iv) in comparative feeling. 

\2S0] But the addition of diverse eternal objects is not of the essence of 
'supplementation': the essence consists in the adjustment of subjective 
importance by functioning of subjective origin. The graduated emotional 



The Subjectivist Principle 165 

intensity of the subject is constituting itself by reference to the physical 
data, datively there and conformally felt. All references to 'attention' 
usually refer to such supplementation in which the addition of diverse 
eternal objects is at a minimum; whereas references to 'emotion' usually 
refer to such supplementation complicated by profuse addition of diverse 
eternal objects. Supplementary feeling is emotional and purposeful, be- 
cause it is what is felt by mere reason of the subjective appropriation of 
the objective data. But it is of the essence of supplementary feeling that it 
does not challenge its initial phase of conformal feeling by any reference to 
incompatibility. The stages of the subjective ingression of eternal objects 
involve essential compatibility. The process exhibits an inevitable con- 
tinuity of functioning. Each stage carries in itself the promise of its suc- 
cessor, and each succeeding stage carries in itself the antecedent out of 
which it arose. For example, t the complexity of the datum carries in itself 
the transition from the conformal feelings to supplementary feelings in 
which contrasts, latent in the datum, achieve real unity between the com- 
ponents. Thus components in the datum, which qua dative, are diverse, 
become united in specific realized contrast. As elements in the datum, the 
components are individually given, with the potentiality for a contrast, 
which in the supplementary stage is either included or excluded. The con- 
formal stage merely transforms the objective content into subjective feel- 
ings. But the supplementary stage adds, or excludes, the realization of the 
contrasts by which the original datum passes into its emotional unity. 

This account enables us to conceive the stage of consciousness as a pro- 
longation of the stage of supplementation. The concrescence is an in- 
dividualization of the whole universe. Every eternal object, whether rele- 
vant [25 J] or irrelevant to the datum, is still patient of its contrasts with 
the datum. The process by which such contrasts are admitted or rejected 
involves the stage of conceptual feeling; and consciousness is evidently 
only a further exhibition of this stage of supplementary feeling. Concep- 
tual feelings do not necessarily involve consciousness. This point is 
elaborated in detail in Part III. 

Again in this explanation, 'contrast' has appeared as the general case; 
while 'identification' is a sub-species arising when one and the same 
eternal object is contrasted in its two modes of functioning. 

Thus the two latter stages of feeling are constituted by the realization of 
specific modes of diversity and identity, the realization also involving an 
adjustment of intensities of relevance. Mere diversity, and mere identity, 
are generic terms. Two components in the constitution of an actual entity 
are specifically diverse and specifically identical by reason of the definite 
potential contrast involved in the diversity of the implicated eternal ob- 
jects, and by reason of the definite self-identity of each eternal object. The 
specific identity arising from the synthesis of diverse modes of functioning 
of one eternal object is the 'individual essence' of that eternal object. But 
the concrescence reaches the goal required by the Category of Objective 



166 Discussions and Applications 

Unity, that in any subject one entity can only be felt once. Nothing can be 
duplicated. The many potentialities for one entity must be synthesizedt 
into one fact. Hence arise the incompatibilities productive of elimination. 

Properly speaking, modes of functioning are compared, thereby evoking 
specific contrasts and specific identifications. The two latter stages of feel- 
ing are the stages of comparison; these stages involve comparisons, and 
comparisons of comparisons; and the admission, or exclusion, of an in- 
definite complexity of potentialities for comparison, in ascending grades. 

The ultimate attainment is 'satisfaction/ This is the final characteriza- 
tion of the unity of feeling of the one [252] actual entity, the 'superject' 
which is familiarly termed the 'subject/ In a sense this satisfaction is two- 
dimensional. It has a dimension of narrowness, and a dimension of width. 
The dimension of narrowness refers to the intensities of individual emo- 
tions arising out of individual components in the datum. In this dimen- 
sion, the higher levels of coordination are irrelevant. The dimension of 
width arises out of the higher levels of coordination, by which the in- 
tensities in the dimension of narrowness become subordinated to a co- 
ordination which depends upon the higher levels of comparison. The 
savouring of the complexity of the universe can enter into satisfaction 
only through the dimension of width. The emotional depths at the low 
levels have their limits: the function of width is to deepen the ocean of 
feeling, and to remove the diminutions of depth produced by the inter- 
ference of diverse emotions uncoordinated at a higher level. In the place 
of the Hegelian hierarchy of categories of thought, the philosophy of 
organism finds a hierarchy of categories of feeling. 

SECTION V 

The reformed subjectivist principle adopted by the philosophy of or- 
ganism is merely an alternative statement of the principle of relativity (the 
fourth Category of Explanation). This principle states that it belongs to 
the nature of a 'being that it is a potential for every 'becoming/ Thus all 
things are to be conceived as qualifications of actual occasions. According 
to the ninth Category of Explanation, how an actual entity becomes con- 
stitutes what that actual entity is. This principle states that the being of a 
res vera is constituted by its 'becoming/ The way in which one actual 
entity is qualified by other actual entities is the 'experience' of the actual 
world enjoyed by that actual entity, as subject. The subjectivist principle** 
is that the whole universe consists of elements disclosed in the analysis of 
the experiences of subjects. Process is the becoming of experience. [253] It 
follows that the philosophy of organism entirely accepts the subjectivist 
bias of modern philosophy. It also accepts Hume's doctrine that nothing 
is to be received into the philosophical scheme which is not discoverable 
as an element in subjective experience. This is the ontological principle. 
Thus Hume's demand that causation be describable as an element in ex- 



The Subjectivist Principle 167 

perience is, on these principles, entirely justifiable. The point of the crit- 
icisms of Hume's procedure is that we have direct intuition of inheritance 
and memory: thus the only problem is, so to describe the general character 
of experience that these intuitions may be included. It is here that Hume 
fails. Also those modern empiricists who substitute law' for 'causation' 
fail even worse than Hume. For 'law' no more satisfies Hume's tests than 
does 'causation/ There is no 'impression' of law, or of lawfulness. Even 
allowing memory, according to Humian principles what has happened in 
experience has happened in experience, and that is all that can be said. 
Everything else is bluff, combined with the fraudulent insertion of 'prob- 
ability' into a conclusion which demands 'blank ignorance.' 

The difficulties of all schools of modern philosophy lie in the fact that, 
having accepted the subjectivist principle,** they continue to use philosoph- 
ical categories derived from another point of view. These categories are not 
wrong, but they deal with abstractions unsuitable for metaphysical use. 
It is for this reason that the notions of the 'extensive continuum' and of 
'presentational t immediacy' require such careful discussion from every 
point of view. The notions of the 'green leaf and of the 'round ball' are 
at the base of traditional metaphysics. They have generated two miscon- 
ceptions: one is the concept of vacuous actuality, void of subjective ex- 
perience; and the other is the concept of quality inherent in substance. 
In their proper character, as high abstractions, both of these notions are of 
the utmost pragmatic use. In fact, language has been formed chiefly to 
express such con- \2S4) cepts. It is for this reason that language, in its 
ordinary usages, penetrates but a short distance into the principles of 
metaphysics. Finally, the reformed subjectivist principle must be repeated: 
that apart from the experiences of subjects there is nothing, nothing, 
nothing, bare nothingness. 

It is now evident that the final analogy to philosophies of the Hegelian 
school, noted in the Preface, is not accidental. The universe is at once the 
multiplicity of res verae] and the solidarity of res verae. The solidarity is 
itself the efficiency of the macroscopic res vera, embodying the principle 
of unbounded permanence acquiring novelty through flux. The multiplicity 
is composed of microscopic res verae, each embodying the principle of 
bounded flux acquiring 'everlasting' permanence. On one side, the one 
becomes many; and on the other side, the many become one. But what 
becomes is always a res vera, and the concrescence t of a res vera is the 
development of a subjective aim. This development is nothing else than 
the Hegelian development of an idea. The elaboration of this aspect of 
the philosophy of organism, with the purpose of obtaining an interpre- 
tation of the religious experience of mankind, is undertaken in Part V of 
these lectures. 

Cosmological story, in every part and in every chapter, relates the inter- 
play of the static vision and the dynamic history. But the whole story is 
comprised within the account of the subjective concrescence of res verae. 



CHAPTER VIII 
SYMBOLIC REFERENCE 

SECTION I 

[255] The pure mode of presentational immediacy gives no information 
as to the past or the future. It merely presents an illustrated portion of 
the presented duration. It thereby defines a cross-section of the universe: 
hut does not in itself define on which side lies the past, and on which 
side the future. In order to solve such questions we now come to the 
interplay between the two pure modes. This mixed mode of perception is 
here named 'symbolic reference/ The failure to lay due emphasis on 
symbolic reference is one of the reasons for metaphysical difficulties; it has 
reduced the notion of 'meaning' to a mystery. 

The first principle, explanatory of symbolic reference, is that for such 
reference a 'common ground' is required. By this necessity for a 'common 
ground' it is meant that there must be components in experience which 
are directly recognized as identical in each of the pure perceptive modes. 
In the transition to a higher phase of experience, there is a concrescence in 
which prehensions in the two modes are brought into a unity of feeling: 
this concrescent unity arises from a congruity of their subjective forms in 
virtue of the identity relation between the two prehensions, owing to some 
components in common. Thus the symbolic reference belongs to one of 
the later originative phases of experience. These later phases are dis- 
tinguished by their new element of originative freedom. Accordingly, 
while the two pure perceptive modes are incapable of error, symbolic 
reference introduces this possibility. When human experience is in ques- 
tion, 'per- \256] ception' almost always means 'perception in the mixed 
mode of symbolic reference/ Thus, in general, human perception is sub- 
ject to error, because, in respect to those components most clearly in 
consciousness, it is interpretative. In fact, error is the mark of the higher 
organisms, and is the schoolmaster by whose agency there is upward 
evolution. For example, the evolutionary use of intelligence is that it 
enables the individual to profit by error without being slaughtered 
by it. But at present, we are not considering conceptual or intellectual 
functioning. 

One main element of common ground, shared between the two pure 
modes, is the presented locus. This locus enters subordinately into the 
perceptive mode of causal efficacy, vaguely exemplifying its participation 
in the general scheme of extensive interconnection, involved in the real 

168 



Symbolic Reference 169 

potentiality. It is not disclosed by that perceptive mode in any other way; 
at least it is not directly disclosed. The further disclosure must be in- 
direct, since contemporary events are exactly those which are neither 
causing, nor caused by, the percipient actual occasion. Now, although the 
various causal pasts (i.e., 'actual worlds') of the contemporary actual occa- 
sions are not wholly identical with the causal past of the percipient actual 
occasion, yet, so far as important relevance is concerned, these causal pasts 
are practically identical. Thus there is, in the mode of causal efficacy, a 
direct perception of those antecedent actual occasions which are causally 
efficacious both for the percipient and for the relevant events in the pre- 
sented locus. The percipient therefore, under the limitation of its own 
perspective, prehends the causal influences to which the presented locus in 
its important regions is subjected. This amounts to an indirect perception 
of this locus, a perception in which the direct components belong to the 
pure mode of causal efficacy. If we now turn to the perceptive mode of 
presentational immediacy, the regions, perceived by direct and indirect 
knowledge respectively, are inverted in comparison with the other mode. 
The presented locus is directly illus- [257] trated by the sensa; while the 
causal past, the causal future, and the other contemporary events, are only 
indirectly perceived by means of their extensive relations to the presented 
locus. It must be remembered that the presented locus has its fourth 
dimension of temporal thickness 'spatialized' as the specious present of 
the percipient. Thus the presented locus, with the animal body of the 
percipient as the region from which perspectives are focussed, is the re- 
gional origin by reference to which in this perceptive mode the complete 
scheme of extensive regions is rendered determinate. The respective roles 
of the two perceptive modes in experience are aptly exemplified by the 
fact that all scientific observations, such as measurements, determinations 
of relative spatial position, determinations of sense-data such as colours, 
sounds, tastes, smells, temperature feelings, touch feelings, etc., are made 
in the perceptive mode of presentational immediacy: and that great care is 
exerted to keep this mode pure, that is to say, devoid of symbolic reference 
to causal efficacy. In this way accuracy is secured, in the sense that the 
direct observation is purged of all interpretation. On the other hand all 
scientific theory is stated in terms referring exclusively to the scheme of 
relatedness, which, so far as it is observed, involves the percepta in the 
pure mode of causal efficacy. It thus stands out at once, that what we 
want to know about, from the point of view either of curiosity or of tech- 
nology, chiefly resides in those aspects of the world disclosed in causal 
efficacy: but that what we can distinctly register is chiefly to be found 
among the percepta in the mode of presentational immediacy. 

The presented locus is a common ground for the symbolic reference, 
because it is directly and distinctly perceived in presentational immediacy, 
and is indistinctly and indirectly perceived in causal efficacy. In the latter 
mode, the indistinctness is such that the detailed geometrical relationships 



170 Discussions and Applications 

are, for the most part, incurably vague. Particular regions are, in this per- 
ceptive mode, [258] in general not distinguishable. In this respect, causal 
efficacy stands in contrast to presentational immediacy with its direct 
illustration of certain distinct regions. 

But there are exceptions to this geometrical indistinctness of causal 
efficacy. In the first place, the separation of the potential extensive scheme 
into past and future lies with the mode of causal efficacy and not with that 
of presentational immediacy. The mathematical measurements, derivable 
from the latter, are indifferent to this distinction; whereas the physical 
theory, expressed in terms of the former, is wholly concerned with it. In 
the next place, the animal body of the percipient is a region for which 
causal efficacy acquires some accuracy in its distinction of regions—not all 
the distinctness of the other mode, but sufficient to allow of important 
identifications. For example, we see with our eyes, we taste with our 
palates, we touch with our hands, etc.: here the causal efficacy defines 
regions which are identified with themselves as perceived with greater 
distinctness by the other mode. To take one example, the slight eye-strain 
in the act of sight is an instance of regional definition by presentational 
immediacy. But in itself it is no more to be correlated with projected sight 
than is a contemporary stomach-ache, or a throb in the foot. The obvious 
correlation of the eye-strain with sight arises from the perception, in the 
other mode, of the eye as efficacious in sight. This correlation takes place 
in virtue of the identity of the two regions, the region of the eye-strain, and 
the region of eye-efficacy. But the eye-strain is so immeasurably the su- 
perior in its power of regional definition that, as usual, we depend upon 
it for explicit geometrical correlations with other parts of the body. In 
this way, the animal body is the great central ground underlying all sym- 
bolic reference. In respect to bodily perceptions the two modes achieve the 
maximum of symbolic reference, and pool their feelings referent to identi- 
cal regions. Every statement about the geometrical relationships of physi- 
cal bodies in the world is ultimately [259] referable to certain definite 
human bodies as origins of reference. A traveller, who has lost his way, 
should not ask, Where am I? What he really wants to know is, Where are 
the other places? He has got his own body, but he has lost them. 



SECTION II 

The second 'ground' for symbolic reference is the connection between 
the two modes effected by the identity of an eternal object ingredient in 
both of them. It will be remembered that the former 'ground' was the 
identity of the extensive region throughout such stages of direct percep- 
tion and synthesis, when there was a diversity of eternal objects, for ex- 
ample, eye-region, visual sensa, eye-strain. But now we pass to a diversity of 
regions combined with an identity of the eternal object, for example, visual 
sensa given by efficacy of eye-region, and the region of the stone perceived 



Symbolic Reference 171 

in the mode of presentational immediacy under the illustration of the 
same visual sensa.t In this connection the 'make-believe' character of mod- 
ern empiricism is well shown by putting into juxtaposition f two widely 
separated passages x from Hume's Treatise: "Impressions may be divided 
into two kinds, those of sensation, and those of reflection. The first kind 
arises in the soul originally, from unknown causes. 7 ' And "If it be per- 
ceived by the eyes, it must be a colour; . . ." 

The earlier passage is Hume's make-believe, when he is thinking of his 
philosophical principles. He then refers the visual sensations 'in the soul' 
to 'unknown causes.' But in the second passage, the heat of argument 
elicits his real conviction— everybody's real conviction— that visual sensa- 
tions arise 'by the eyes.' The causes are not a bit 'unknown,' and among 
them there is usually to be found the efficacy of the eyes. If Hume had 
stopped to investigate the alternative causes for the occurrence of visual 
sensations— for example, eye-sight, or excessive consumption of alcohol- 
he might have hesitated in his [260] profession of ignorance. If the causes 
be indeed unknown, it is absurd to bother about eye-sight and intoxica- 
tion. The reason for the existence of oculists and prohibitionists is that 
various causes are known. 

We can now complete our account of presentational immediacy. In this 
perceptive mode the sensa are 'given' for the percipient, but this donation 
is not to be ascribed to the spatial object which is thereby presented, the 
stone, for example. Now it is a primary doctrine that what is 'given' is 
given by reason of objectifications of actual entities from the settled past. 
We therefore seek for the actual occasions to whose objectifications this 
donation is to be ascribed. In this procedure we are only agreeing with the 
spirit of Descartes' fifty-second principle (Part I): "For this reason, when 
we perceive any attribute, we therefore conclude that some existing thing 
or substance to which it may be attributed, is necessarily present." Com- 
mon sense, physical theory, and physiological theory, combine to point out 
a historic route of inheritance, from actual occasion to succeeding actual 
occasion, first physically in the external environment, then physiologi- 
cally—through the eyes in the case of visual data— up the nerves, into the 
brain. The donation— taking sight as an example— is not confined to defi- 
nite sensa, such as shades of colour: it also includes geometrical relation- 
ships to the general environment. In this chain of inheritances, the eye is 
picked out to rise into perceptive prominence, because another historic 
route of physiological inheritance starts from it, whereby a later occa- 
sion (almost identical with the earlier) is illustrated by the sensum 'eye- 
strain' in the mode of presentational immediacy; but this eye-strain is an- 
other allied story. In the visual datum for the percipient there are first these 
components of colour-sensa combined with geometrical relationships to 
the external world of the settled past: secondly, there are also in the datum 
the general geometrical relationships forming the completion of this po- 
tential scheme into the contemporary world, and into [261] the future. 

1 Book I, Part I, Sects. II and VI (italics mine).* 



1 72 Discussions and Applications 

The responsive phase absorbs these data as material for a subjective unity 
of feeling: the supplemental stage heightens the relevance of the colour- 
sensa, and supplements the geometrical relationships of the past by picking 
out the contemporary region of the stone to be the contemporary repre- 
sentative of the efficacious historic routes. There then results in the mode 
of presentational immediacy, the perception of the region illustrated by the 
sensum termed 'grey/ The term 'stone' is primarily applied to a certain 
historic route in the past, which is an efficacious element in this train of 
circumstance. It is only properly applied to the contemporary region il- 
lustrated by 'grey' on the assumption that this contemporary region is the 
prolongation, of that historic route, into the presented locus. This assump- 
tion may, or may not, be true. Further, the illustration of the contemporary 
region of *grey ? may be due to quite other efficacious historic routes— for 
example, to lighting effects arranged by theatrical producers— and in such 
a case, the term 'stone' may suggest an even more violent error than in the 
former example. What is directly perceived, certainly and without shadow 
of doubt, is a grey region of the presented locus. Any further interpretation, 
instinctive or by intellectual judgment, must be put down to symbolic 
reference. 

This account makes it plain that the perceptive mode of presentational 
immediacy arises in the later, originative, integrative phases of the process 
of concrescence. The perceptive mode of causal efficacy is to be traced to 
the constitution of the datum by reason of which there is a concrete per- 
cipient entity. Thus we must assign the mode of causal efficacy to the 
fundamental constitution of an occasion so that in germ this mode be- 
longs even to organisms of the lowest grade; while the mode of presenta- 
tional immediacy requires the more sophistical activity of the later stages 
of process, so as to belong only to organisms of a relatively high grade. So 
far as we can judge, such high-grade organisms are relatively few, in [262] 
comparison with the whole number of organisms in our immediate en- 
vironment. Presentational immediacy is an outgrowth from the complex 
datum implanted by causal efficacy. But, by the originative power of the 
supplemental phase, what was vague, ill defined, and hardly relevant in 
causal efficacy, becomes distinct, well defined, and importantly relevant in 
presentational immediacy. In the responsive phase, the grey colour, t and 
the geometrical relations between the efficacious, bodily routes and the 
contemporary occasions, were subjective sensationst associated with barely 
relevant geometrical relations: they represented the vivid sensational qual- 
ities in the enjoyment of which the percipient subject barely distinguished 
vague indirect relationships to the external world. The supplemental phase 
lifts the presented duration into vivid distinctness, so that the vague effi- 
cacy of the indistinct external world in the immediate past is precipitated 
upon the representative regions in the contemporary present. In the usual 
language, the sensations are projected. This phraseology is unfortunate; 
for there never were sensations apart from these geometrical relations. 



Symbolic Reference 173 

Presentational immediacy is the enhancement of the importance of rela- 
tionships which were already in the datum, vaguely and with slight rele- 
vance. This fact, that presentational immediacy' deals with the same 
datum as does 'causal efficacy/ gives the ultimate reason why there is a 
common 'ground' for 'symbolic reference/ The two modes express the 
same datum under different proportions of relevance. The two genetic- 
processes involving presentational immediacy must be carefully distin- 
guished. There is first the complex genetic process in which presentational 
immediacy originates. This process extends downwards even to occasions 
which belong to the historic routes of certain types of inorganic enduring 
objects, namely, to those enduring objects whose aggregates form the 
subject-matter of the science of Newtonian dynamics. t Secondly, prehen- 
sions in the mode of presentational immediacy are involved as components 
in [263] integration with other prehensions which are usually, though not 
always, f in other modes. These integrations often involve various types of 
'symbolic reference/ This symbolic reference is the interpretativet element 
in human experience. Language almost exclusively refers to presentational 
immediacy as interpreted by symbolic reference. For example, we say that 
'we see the stone 7 where stone is an interpretation of stone-image: also 
we say that 'we see the stone-image with our eyes'; this is an interpreta- 
tion arising from the complex integration of (i) the causal efficacy of the 
antecedent eye in the vision, (ii) the presentational immediacy of the 
stone-image, (iii) the presentational immediacy of the eye-strain. When 
we say that 'we see the stone with our eyes/ the interpretations of these 
two examples are combined. 

SECTION III 

The discussion of the problem constituted by the connection between 
causation and perception t has been conducted by the various schools of 
thought derived from Hume and Kant under the misapprehension gen- 
erated by an inversion of the true constitution of experience. The inversion 
was explicit in the writings of Hume and of Kant: for both of them presen- 
tational immediacy was the primary fact of perception, and any apprehen- 
sion of causation was, somehow or other, to be .elicited from this primary 
fact. This view of the relation between causation and perception, as items 
in experience, was not original to these great philosophers. It is to be found 
presupposed in Locke and Descartes; and they derived it from mediaeval 
predecessors. But the modern critical movement in philosophy arose when 
Hume and Kant emphasized the fundamental, inescapable, importance 
which this doctrine possesses for any philosophy admitting its truth. The 
philosophy of organism does not admit its truth, and thus rejects the 
touchstone which is the neolithic weapon of 'criticaF philosophy. It must 
be remembered that clearness in consciousness is no evidence \264] for 
primitiveness in the genetic process: the opposite doctrine is more nearly 
true. 



174 Discussions and Applications 

Owing to its long dominance, it has been usual to assume as an obvious 
fact the primacy of presentational immediacy. We open our eyes and our 
other sense-organs; we then survey the contemporary world decorated with 
sights, and sounds, and tastes; and then, by the sole aid of this information 
about the contemporary world, thus decorated, we draw what conclusions 
we can as to the actual world. No philosopher really holds that this is the 
sole source of information: Hume and his followers appeal vaguely to 
'memory' and to 'practice/ in order to supplement their direct information; 
and Kant wrote other Critiques^ in order to supplement his Critique of 
Pure Reason. But the general procedure of modern philosophical 'criticism' 
is to tie down opponents strictly to the front door of presentational im- 
mediacy as the sole source of information, while one's own philosophy 
makes its escape by a back door veiled under the ordinary usages of 
language. 

If this 'Humian' doctrine be true, certain conclusions as to 'behaviour't 
ought to follow— conclusions which, in the most striking way, are not 
verified. It is almost indecent to draw the attention of philosophers to the 
minor transactions of daily life, away from the classic sources of philo- 
sophic knowledge; but, after all, it is the empiricists who began this appeal 
to Caesar. 

According to Hume, our behaviour presupposing causation is due to the 
repetition of associated presentational experiences. Thus the vivid present- 
ment of the antecedent percepts should vividly generate the behaviour, 
in action or thought, towards the associated consequent. The clear, dis- 
tinct, overwhelming perception of the one is the overwhelming reason 
for the subjective transition to the other. For behaviour, interpretable as 
implying causation, is on this theory the subjective response to presenta- 
tional immediacy. According to Hume this subjective response is the be- 
ginning and the end of all that [26S] there is to be said about causation. 
In Hume's theory the response is response to presentational immediacy, 
and to nothing else. Also the situation elicited in response is nothing but 
an immediate presentation, or the memory of one. Let us apply this ex- 
planation to reflex action: In the dark, the electric light is suddenly turned 
on and the man's eyes blink. There is a simple physiological explanation 
of this trifling incident. 

But this physiological explanation is couched wholly in terms of causal 
efficacy: it is the conjectural record of the travel of a spasm of excitement 
along nerves to some nodal centre, and of the return spasm of contraction 
back to the eyelids. The correct technical phraseology would not alter the 
fact that the explanation does not involve any appeal to presentational 
immediacy either for actual occasions resident in the nerves, or for the 
man. At the most there is a tacit supposition as to what a physiologist, 
who in fact was not there, might have seen if he had been there, and if 
he could have vivisected the man without affecting these occurrences, and 
if he could have observed with a microscope which also in fact was absent. 



Symbolic Reference 175 

Thus the physiological explanation remains, from the point of view of 
Hume's philosophy, a tissue of irrelevancies. It presupposes a side of the 
universe about which, on Hume's theory, we must remain in blank ig- 
norance. 

Let us now dismiss physiology and turn to the private experience of the 
blinking man. The sequence of percepts, in the mode of presentational 
immediacy, ist flash of light, feeling of eye-closure, instant of darkness. 
The three are practically simultaneous; though the flash maintains its 
priority over the other two, and these two latter percepts are indistinguish- 
able as to priority. According to the philosophy of organism, the man also 
experiences another percept in the mode of causal efficacy. He feels that 
the experiences of the eye in the matter of the flash are causal of the blink. 
The man himself will have no doubt of it. In fact, it is the feeling [266] of 
causality which enables the man to distinguish the priority of the flash; 
and the inversion of the argument, whereby the temporal sequence 'flash 
to blink' is made the premise for the 'causality' belief, has its origin in 
pure theory. The man will explain his experience by saying, "The flash 
made me blink'; and if his statement be doubted, he will reply, 'I know 
it, because I felt it.' 

The philosophy of organism accepts the man's statement, that the flash 
made him blink. But Hume intervenes with another explanation. He first 
points out that in the mode of presentational immediacy there is no per- 
cept of the flash making the man blink. In this mode there are merely 
the two percepts— the flash and the blink— combining the two latter of 
the three percepts under the one term 'blink.' Hume refuses to admit the 
man's protestation, that the compulsion to blink is just what he did feel. 
The refusal is based on the dogma t that all percepts are in the mode of 
presentational immediacy— a dogma not to be upset by a mere appeal to 
direct experience. Besides,! Hume has another interpretation of the man's 
experience: what the man really felt was his habit of blinking after flashes. 
The word 'association' explains it all, according to Hume. But how can a 
'habit' be felt, when a 'cause' cannot be felt? Is there any presentational 
immediacy in the feeling of a 'habit'? Hume by a sleight of hand confuses 
a 'habit of feeling blinks after flashes' with a 'feeling of the habit of feel- 
ing blinks after flashes/ 

We have here a perfect example of the practice of applying the test of 
presentational immediacy to procure the critical rejection of some doc- 
trines, and of allowing other doctrines to slip out by a back door, so as 
to evade the test. The notion of causation arose because mankind lives 
amid experiences in the mode of causal efficacy. 

SECTION IV 

We will keep to the appeal to ordinary experience, and \267] consider 
another situation, which Hume's philosophy is ill equipped to explain. 



176 Discussions and Applications 

The 'causal feeling' according to that doctrine arises from the long asso- 
ciation of well-marked presentations of sensa, one precedent to the other. 
It would seem therefore that inhibitions of sensa, given in presentational 
immediacy, should be accompanied by a corresponding absence of 'causal 
feeling'; for the explanation of how there is 'causal feeling' presupposes 
the well-marked familiar sensa, in presentational immediacy. Unfortu- 
nately the contrary is the case. An inhibition of familiar sensa is very apt 
to leave us a prey to vague terrors respecting a circumambient world of 
causal operations. In the dark there are vague presences, doubtfully feared: 
in the silence, the irresistible causal efficacy of nature presses itself upon 
us; in the vagueness of the low hum of insects in an August woodland, the 
inflow into ourselves of feelings from enveloping nature overwhelms us; 
in the dim consciousness of half-sleep, the presentations of sense fade 
away, and we are left with the vague feeling of influences from vague 
things around us. It is quite untrue that the feelings of various types of 
influences are dependent upon the familiarity of well-marked sensa in 
immediate presentment. Every way of omitting the sensa still leaves us a 
prey to vague feelings of influence. Such feelings, divorced from immediate 
sensa, are pleasant, or unpleasant, according to mood; but they are always 
vague as to spatial and temporal definition, though their explicit domi- 
nance in experience may be heightened in the absence of sensa. 

Further, our experiences! of our various bodily parts are primarily per- 
ceptions of them as reasons for 'projected' sensa : the hand] is the reason 
for the projected touch-sensum, the eye is the reason for the projected 
sight-sensum. Our bodily experience is primarily an experience of the de- 
pendence of presentational immediacy upon causal efficacy. Hume's doc- 
trine inverts this relationship by making causal efficacy, as an experience, 
dependent upon presentational immediacy. This doc- [268] trine, whatever 
be its merits, is not based upon any appeal to experience. 

Bodily experiences, in the mode of causal efficacy, are distinguished by 
their comparative accuracy of spatial definition. The causal influences from 
the body have lost the extreme vagueness of those which inflow from the 
external world. But, even for the body, causal efficacy is dogged with 
vagueness compared to presentational immediacy. These conclusions are 
confirmed if we descend* the scale of organic being. It does not seem 
to be the sense of causal awareness that the lower living things lack, so 
much as variety of sense-presentation, and then vivid distinctness of presen- 
tational immediacy. But animals, and even vegetables, in low forms of 
organism exhibit modes of behaviour directed towards self-preservation. 
There is every indication of a vague feeling of causal relationship with 
the external world, of some intensity, vaguely defined as to quality, and 
with some vague definition as to locality. A jellyfish advances and with- 
draws, and in so doing exhibits some perception of causal relationship with 
the world beyond itself; a plant grows downwards to the damp earth, and 
upwards towards the light. There is thus some direct reason for attributing 



Symbolic Reference 177 

dim, slow feelings of causal nexus, although we have no reason for any 
ascription of the definite percepts in the mode of presentational im- 
mediacy. 

But the philosophy of organism attributes 'feeling' throughout the ac- 
tual world. It bases this doctrine upon the directly observed fact that 
'feeling' survives as a known element constitutive of the 'formal' existence 
of such actual entities as we can best observe. Also when we observe the 
causal nexus, devoid of interplay with sense-presentation, the influx of 
feeling with vague qualitative and 'vector' definition t is what we find. The 
dominance of the scalar physical quantity, inertia, in the Newtonian 
physics obscured the recognition of the truth that all fundamental phys- 
ical quantities are vector and not scalar. 

[269] When we pass to inorganic actual occasions, we have lost the two 
higher originative phases in the 'process,' namely, the 'supplemental' phase, 
and the 'mental' phase. They are lost in the sense that, so far as our ob- 
servations go, they are negligible. The influx of objectifications of the 
actualities of the world as organized vehicles of feeling is responded to by 
a mere subjective appropriation of such elements of feeling in their re- 
ceived relevance. The inorganic occasions are merely what the causal past 
allows them to be. 

As we pass to the inorganic world, causation never for a moment seems 
to lose its grip. What is lost is originativeness, and any evidence of im- 
mediate absorption in the present. So far as we can see, inorganic entities 
are vehicles for receiving, for storing in a napkin, and for restoring with- 
out loss or gain. 

In the actual world we discern four grades of actual occasions, grades 
which are not to be sharply distinguished from each other. First, and 
lowest, there are the actual occasions in so-called 'empty space'; secondly, 
there are the actual occasions which are moments in the life-histories of 
enduring non-living objects, such as electrons or other primitive organ- 
isms; thirdly, there are the actual occasions which are moments in the 
life-histories of enduring living objects; fourthly, there are the actual oc- 
casions which are moments in the life-histories of enduring objects with 
conscious knowledge. 

We may imaginatively conjecture that the first grade is to be identified 
with actual occasions for which 'presented durations' are negligible ele- 
ments among their data, negligible by reason of negligible presentational 
immediacy. Thus no intelligible definition of rest and motion is possible 
for historic routes including them, because they correspond to no inherent 
spatializationf of the actual world. 

The second grade is to be identified with actual occasions for which 
'presented durations' are important elements in their data, but with a limi- 
tation only to be [270] observed in the lower moments of human experi- 
ence. In such occasions the data of felt sensa, derived "from the more 
primitive data of causal efficacy, are projected onto the contemporary 



178 Discussions and Applications 

'presented locus' without any clear illustration of special regions in that 
locus. The past has been lifted into the present, but the vague differentia- 
tions in the past have not been transformed into any precise differentia- 
tions within the present. The enhancement of precision has not arrived. 

The third grade is to be identified with occasions in which presentational 
immediacy has assumed some enhanced precision, so that 'symbolic trans- 
ference' has lifted into importance precisely discriminated regions in the 
'presented duration/ The delicate activities of self-preservation are now 
becoming possible by the transference of the vague message of the past 
onto the more precisely discriminated regions of the presented duration. 
Symbolic transference is dependent upon the flashes of conceptual orig- 
inality constituting life. 

The fourth grade is to be identified with the canalized importance of 
free conceptual functionings, whereby blind experience is analysed by 
comparison with the imaginative realization of mere potentiality. In this 
way, experience receives a reorganization in the relative importance of its 
components by the joint operation of imaginative enjoyment and of judg- 
ment. The growth of reason is the increasing importance of critical judg- 
ment in the discipline of imaginative enjoyment. 

SECTION V 

One reason for the philosophical difficulties over causation is that Hume, 
and subsequently Kant, conceived the causal nexus as, in its primary 
character, derived from the presupposed sequence of immediate presenta- 
tions. But if we interrogate experience, the exact converse is the case; the 
perceptive mode of immediate presentation affords information about the 
percepta in the more aboriginal mode of causal efficacy. 

[271] Thus symbolic reference, though in complex human experience 
it works both ways, is chiefly to be thought of as the elucidation of per- 
cepta in the mode of causal efficacy by the fluctuating intervention of 
percepta in the mode of presentational immediacy. 

The former mode produces percepta which are vague, not to be con- 
trolled, heavy with emotion: it produces the sense of derivation from an 
immediate past, and of passage to an immediate future; a sense of emo- 
tional feeling, belonging to oneself in the past, passing into oneself in 
the present, and passing from oneself in the present towards oneself in the 
future; a sense of influx of influence from other vaguer presences in the 
past, localized and yet evading local definition, such influence modifying, 
enhancing, inhibiting, diverting, the stream of feeling which we are re- 
ceiving, unifying, enjoying, and transmitting. This is our general sense 
of existence, as one item among others, in an efficacious actual world. 

By diversion of attention we can inhibit its entry into consciousness; 
but, whether mentally analysed or no, it remains the given uncontrolled 
basis upon which our character weaves itself. Our bodies are largely con- 



Symbolic Reference 179 

trivances whereby some central actual occasion may inherit these basic 
experiences of its antecedent parts. Thus organic bodies have their parts 
coordinated by a peculiar vividness in their mutual inheritance. In a sense, 
the difference between a living organism and the inorganic environment 
is only a question of degree; but it is a difference of degree which makes 
all the difference— in effect, it is a difference of quality. 

The percepta in the mode of presentational immediacy have the con- 
verse characteristics. In comparison, they are distinct, definite, controllable, 
apt for immediate enjoyment, and with the minimum of reference to past, 
or to future. We are subject to our percepta in the mode of efficacy, we 
adjust our percepta in the mode of immediacy. But, in fact, our process 
of self-construction for the achievement of unified experience produces! 
a new [272] product, in which percepta in one mode, and percepta in the 
other mode, are synthesized into one subjective feeling. For example, we 
are perceiving before our eyes a grey stone. 

We shall find that generally— though not always— the adjectival words 
express information derived from the mode of immediacy, while the sub- 
stantives convey our dim percepts in the mode of efficacy. For example, 
'grey' refers to the grey shape immediately before our eyes: this percept 
is definite, limited, controllable, pleasant or unpleasant, and with no ref- 
erence to past or to future. It is this sort of percept which has led to Des- 
cartes' definition of substances as 'requiring nothing but themselves in 
order to exist/ and to his notion of 'extension' as the principal f attribute 
of a genus of substances. It has also led to Hume's notion of 'impressions 
of sensation' t arising from unknown sources, and in complete indepen- 
dence so far as any discerniblef nexus is concerned. But the other element 
in the compound percept has a widely different character. The word 
'stone' is selected, no doubt, because its dictionary meaning will afford 
some help in understanding the particular percepta meant. But the word 
is meant to refer to particular feelings of efficacy in the immediate past, 
combined with anticipations for the immediate future; this feeling is 
vaguely localized, and conjecturallyt identified with the very definite 
localization of the 'grey' perceptum. 

Thus, so far as concerns conscious judgment, the symbolic reference is 
the acceptance of the evidence of percepta, in the mode of immediacy, 
as evidence for the localization and discrimination of vague percepta in 
the mode of efficacy. So far as bodily feelings are concerned, there is some 
direct check on this procedure; but, beyond the body, the appeal is to the 
pragmatic consequences, involving some future state of bodily feelings 
which can be checked up. 

But throughout this discussion of perception there has been excessive 
emphasis on the mental phase in the [273} experiential process. This is 
inevitable because we can only discuss experiences which have entered into 
conscious analysis. But perception is a feeling which has its seat in the two 
earlier phases of the experiential! process, namely, the 'responsive' phase, 



1 80 Discussions and Appli ations 

and the 'supplemental' phase. Perception, in these phases, is the appropri- 
ation of the datum by the subject so as to transform the datum into a 
unity of subjective feeling. The mode of efficacy belongs to the responsive 
phase, in which the objectifications are felt according to their relevance 
in the datum: the mode of immediacy belongs to the supplemental phase 
in which the faint indirect relevance, in the datum, of relationships to re- 
gions of the presented locus ist lifted into distinct, prominent, relevance. 
The question as to which regions have their relatedness to other con- 
stituents of the datum— such as 'grey/ for instance— thus accentuated, 
depends upon the coordination of the bodily organs through which the 
routes of inheritance pass. In a fortunately construed** animal body, this 
selection is determined chiefly by the inheritance received by the super- 
ficial organst=the skin, the eyes, etc.— from the external environment, 
and preserves the relevance of the vector character of that external 
inheritance. When this is the case, the perceptive mode of immediacy 
has definite relevance to the future efficacy of the external environment, 
and then indirectly illustrates the inheritance which the presented locus 
receives from the immediate past. 

But this illustration does not gain its first importance from any rational 
analysis. The two modes are unified by a blind symbolic reference by which 
supplemental feelings derived from the intensive, but vague, mode of 
efficacy are precipitated upon the distinct regions illustrated in the mode 
of immediacy. The integration of the two modes in supplemental feeling 
makes what would have been vague to be distinct, and what would have 
been shallow to be intense. This is the perception of the grey stone, in the 
mixed mode of symbolic reference. 

[274] Such perception can be erroneous, in the sense that the feeling 
associates regions in the presented locus with inheritances from the past, 
which in fact have not been thus transmitted into the present regions. 
In the mixed mode, the perceptive determination is purely due to the 
bodily organs, and thus there is a gap in the perceptive logic— so to speak. 
This gap is not due to any conceptual freedom on the part of the ultimate 
subject. It is not a mistake due to consciousness. It is due to the fact that 
the body, as an instrument for synthesizing and enhancing feelings, is 
faulty, in the sense that it produces feelings which have but slight reference 
to the real state of the presented duration. 

SECTION VI 

Symbolic reference between the two perceptive modes affords the main 
example of the principles which govern all symbolism. The requisites for 
symbolism are that there be two species of percepta; and that a perceptum 
of one species has some 'ground' in common with a perceptum of another 
species, so that a correlation between the pair of percepta is established. 



Symbolic Reference 181 

The feelings, and emotions, and genera characteristics associated with the 
members of one species are in some ways markedly diverse from those as- 
sociated with the other species. Then there is 'symbolic reference' between 
the two species when the perception of a member of one species evokes 
its correlate in the other species, and precipitates upon this correlate the 
fusion of feelings, emotions, and derivate actions, which belong to either 
of the pair of correlates, and which are also enhanced by this correlation. 
The species from which the symbolic reference starts is called the 'species 
of symbols/ and the species withf which it ends is called the 'species of 
meanings/ In this way there can be symbolic reference between two species 
in the same perceptive mode: but the chief example of symbolism, upon 
which is based a great portion of the lives [275] of all high-grade animals, 
is that between the two perceptive modes. 

Symbolism can be justified, or unjustified. The test of justification must 
always be pragmatic. In so far ast symbolism has led to a route of inheri- 
tance, along the percipient occasions forming the percipient 'person/ 
which constitutes a fortunate evolution, the symbolism is justified; and, 
in so far as the symbolism has led to an unfortunate evolution, it is un- 
justified. In a slightly narrower sense the symbolism can be right or wrong; 
and Tightness or wrongness is also tested pragmatically. Along the 'historic 
route' there is the inheritance of feelings derived from symbolic reference: 
now, if feelings respecting some definite element in experience be clue 
to two sources, one source being this inheritance, and the other source 
being direct perception in one of the pure modes, then, if the feelings 
from the two sources enhance each other by synthesis, the symbolic ref- 
erence is right; but, if they are at variance so as to depress each other, the 
symbolic reference is wrong. The Tightness, or wrongness, of symbolism is 
an instance of the symbolism being fortunate or unfortunate; but mere 
'rectitude/ in the sense defined above, does' not cover all that can be in- 
cluded in the more general concept of 'fortune/ So much of human ex- 
perience is bound up with symbolic reference, that it is hardly an exag- 
geration to say that the very meaning of truth is pragmatic. But though 
this statement is hardly an exaggeration, still it is an exaggeration, for the 
pragmatic test can never work, unless on some occasion— in the future, 
or in the present— there is a definite determination of what is true on that 
occasion. Otherwise the poor pragmatist remains an intellectual Hamlet, 
perpetually adjourning decision of judgment to some later date. According 
to the doctrines here stated, the day of judgment arrives when the 'mean- 
ing' is sufficiently distinct and relevant, as a perceptum in its proper pure 
mode, to afford comparison with the precipitate of feeling derived 
[276] from symbolic reference. There is no inherent distinction between 
the sort of percepta which are symbols f and the sort of percepta which 
are meanings. When two species are correlated by a 'ground' of relatedness, 
it depends upon the experiential process, constituting the percipient! 



182 Discussions and Applications 

subject, as to which species is the group of symbols, and which is the group 
of meanings. Also it equally depends upon the percipient as to whether 
there is any symbolic reference at all. 

Language is the example of symbolism which most naturally presents 
itself for consideration of the uses of symbolism. Its somewhat artificial 
character makes the various constitutive elements in symbolism to be the 
more evident. For the sake of simplicity, only spoken language will be con- 
sidered here. 

A single word is not one definite sound. Every instance of its utterance 
differs in some respect from every other instance: the pitch of the voice, 
the intonation, the accent, the quality of sound, the rhythmic relations 
of the component sounds, the intensity of sound, all vary. Thus a word is 
a species of sounds, with specific identity and individual differences. When 
we recognize the species, we have heard the word. But what we have heard 
is merely the sound— euphonious or harsh, concordant with or discordant 
with other accompanying sounds. The word is heard in the pure perceptive 
mode of immediacy, and primarily elicits merely the contrasts and iden- 
tities with other percepta in that mode. So far there is no symbolic 
interplay. 

If the meaning of the word be an event, then either that event is directly 
known, as a remembered perceptum in an earlier occasion of the percip- 
ient's life, or that event is only vaguely known by its dated spatio-temporal 
nexus with events which are directly known. Anyhow there is a chain of 
symbolic references (inherited along the historic route of the percipient's 
life, and reinforced by the production of novel and symbolic references 
at various occasions along that route) whereby in the datum [277] for the 
percipient occasion there is a faintly relevant nexus between the word in 
that occasion of utterance and the event. The sound of the word,! in 
presentational immediacy, by symbolic references elicits this nexus into 
important relevance, and thence precipitates feelings, and thoughts, upon 
the enhanced objectification of the event. Such enhanced relevance of the 
event may be unfortunate, or even unjustified; but it is the function of 
words to produce it. The discussion of mentality is reserved for Part III: 
it is a mistake to think of words as primarily the vehicle of thoughts. 

Language also illustrates the doctrine that, in regard to a couple of prop- 
erly correlated species of things, it depends upon the constitution of the 
percipient subject to assign which species is acting as 'symbol' and which 
as 'meaning.' The word 'forest' may suggest! memories of forests; but 
equally the sight of a forest, or memories of forests, may suggest the word 
'forest.' Sometimes we are bothered because the immediate experience has 
not elicited the word we want. In such a case the word with the right sort 
of correlation with the experience has failed to become importantly rele- 
vant in the constitution of our experience. 

But we do not usually think of the things as symbolizing the words cor- 
related to them. This failure to invert our ideas arises from the most useful 



Symbolic Reference 183 

aspect of symbolism. In general the symbols are more handy elements in 
our experience than are the meanings. We can say the word 'forest' when- 
ever we like; but only under certain conditions can we directly experience 
an existent forest. To procure such an experience usually involves a prob- 
lem of transportation only possible on our holidays. Also it is not so easy 
even to remember forest scenes with any vividness; and we usually find that 
the immediate experience of the word 'forest' helps to elicit such recollec- 
tions. In such ways language is handy as an instrument of communication 
along the successive occasions of the historic route forming the life of one 
individual. By an [278] extension of these same principles of behaviour, it 
communicates from the occasions of one individual to the succeeding oc- 
casions of another individual. The same means which are handy for pro- 
curing the immediate presentation of a word to oneself are equally effec- 
tive for presenting it to another person. Thus we may have a two-way 
system of symbolic reference involving two persons, A and B. The forest, 
recollected by A, symbolizes the word 'forest' for A; then A, for his own 
sake and for B's sake, pronounces the word 'forest'*; then by the efficacy 
of the environment and of B'$ bodily parts, and by the supplemental en- 
hancement due to B's experiential process, the word 'forest' is perceived 
by B in the mode of immediacy; and, finally by symbolic reference, B 
recollects vaguely various forest scenes. In this use of language for com- 
munication between two persons, there is in principle nothing which differs 
from its use by one person for communication along the route of his own 
actual occasions. 

This discussion shows that one essential purpose of symbols arises from 
their handiness. For this reason the Egyptian papyrus made ink-written 
language a more useful symbolism than the Babylonian language im- 
pressed on brick. It is easier to smell incense than to produce certain 
religious emotions; so, if the two can be correlated, incense is a suitable 
symbol for such emotions. Indeed, for many purposes, certain aesthetic 
experiences which are easy to produce make better symbols than do words, 
written or spoken. Quarrels over symbolism constitute one of the many 
causes of religious discord. One difficulty in symbolism is that the unhandy 
meanings are often vague. For instance, this is the case with the percepta 
in the mode of efficacy which are symbolized by percepta in the mode of 
immediacy: also, as another instance, the incense is definite, but the re- 
ligious emotions are apt to be indefinite. The result is that the meanings 
are often shifting and indeterminate. This happens even in the case of 
words: other people misun- [279] derstand their import. Also, in the case 
of incense the exact religious emotions finally reached are very uncertain: 
perhaps we would prefer that some of them were never elicited. 

Symbolism is essential for the higher grades of life; and the errors of 
symbolism can never be wholly avoided. 



CHAPTER IX 
THE PROPOSITIONS 

SECTION I 

[280] A living occasion is characterized by a flash of novelty among the 
appetitions of its mental pole. Such 'appetitions/ i.e., 'conceptual prehen- 
sions/ can be 'pure' or 'impure/ An 'impure' prehension arises from the 
integration of a 'pure 7 conceptual prehension with a physical prehension 
originating in the physical pole. The datum of a pure conceptual prehen- 
sion is an eternal object; the datum of an impure prehension is a proposi- 
tion, otherwise termed a 'theory/ 

The integration of a conceptual and physical prehension need not issue 
in an impure prehension: the eternal object as a mere potentiality, un- 
determined as to its physical realization, may lose its indetermination, i.e., 
its universality, by integration with itself as an element in the realized 
definiteness of the physical datum of the physical prehension. In this case 
we obtain what in Part III is termed a 'physical purpose/ In a physical 
purpose the subjective form has acquired a special appetition— adversion 
or aversion— in respect to that eternal object as a realized element of 
definiteness in that physical datum. This acquisition is derived from the 
conceptual prehension. The 'abruptness* of mental operations is here il- 
lustrated. The physical datum in itself illustrates an indefinite number 
of eternal objects. The 'physical purpose 7 has focussed appetition upon an 
abruptly selected eternal object. 

But with the growth of intensity in the mental pole, evidenced by the 
flash of novelty in appetition, the appetition takes the form of a 'preposi- 
tional prehension/ [281] These prehensions will be studied more partic- 
ularly in Part III. They are the prehensions of 'theories/ It is evident, how- 
ever, that the primary function of theories is as a lure for feeling, thereby 
providing immediacy of enjoyment and purpose. Unfortunately theories, 
under their name of 'propositions/ have been handed over to logicians, 
who have countenanced the doctrine that their one function is to be 
judged as to their truth or falsehood. Indeed Bradley does not mention 
'propositions' in his Logic. t He writes only of 'judgments/ Other authors 
define propositions as a component in judgment. The doctrine here laid 
clown is that, in the realization of propositions, 'judgment 7 is at very rare 
component, and so is 'consciousness/ The existence of imaginative litera- 

184 



The Propositions 185 

ture should have warned logicians that their narrow doctrine is absurd. 
It is difficult to believe that all logicians as they read Hamlet's speech, 
"To be, or not to be: . . ." commence by judging whether the initial 
proposition be true or false, and keep up the task of judgment through- 
out the whole thirty-five lines. Surely, at some point in the reading, judg- 
ment is eclipsed by aesthetic delight. The speech, for the theatre audience, 
is purely theoretical, a mere lure for feeling. 

Again, consider strong religious emotion— consider a Christian medi- 
tating on the sayings in the Gospels. He is not judging 'true or false'; he 
is eliciting their value as elements in feeling. In fact, he may ground his 
judgment of truth upon his realization of value. But such a procedure is 
impossible, if the primary function of propositions is to be elements in 
judgments. 

The 'lure for feeling' is the final cause guiding the concrescence of 
feelings. By this concrescence the multifold datum of the primary phase 
is gathered into the unity of the final satisfaction of feeling. The 'objective 
lure' is that discrimination among eternal objects introduced into the 
universe by the real internal constitutions of the actual occasions forming 
the datum of the concrescence under review. This discrimination also 
in- \282] volves eternal objects excluded from value in the temporal occa- 
sions of that datum, in addition to involving the eternal objects included 
for such occasions. 

For example, consider the Battle of Waterloo. This battle resulted in 
the defeat of Napoleon, and in a constitution of our actual world grounded 
upon that defeat. But the abstract notions, expressing the possibilities of 
another course of history which would' have followed upon his victory, 
are relevant to the facts which actually happened. We may not think it 
of practical importance that imaginative historians should dwell upon 
such hypothetical alternatives. But we confess their relevance in thinking 
about them at all, even to the extent of dismissing them. But some imag- 
inative writers do not dismiss such ideas. Thus, in our actual world of 
today, there is a penumbra of eternal objects, constituted by relevance to 
the Battle of Waterloo. Some people do admit elements from this pen- 
umbral complex into effective feeling, and others wholly exclude them. 
Some are conscious of this internal decision of admission or rejection; for 
others the ideas float into their minds as day-dreams without consciousness 
of deliberate decision; for others, their emotional tone, of gratification 
or regret, of friendliness or hatred, is obscurely influenced by this pen- 
umbra of alternatives, without any conscious analysis of its content. The 
elements of this penumbra are prepositional prehensions, and not pure 
conceptual prehensions; for their implication of the particular nexus which 
ist the Battle of Waterloo is an essential factor. 

Thus an element in this penumbral complex is what is termed a 'propo- 
sition/ A proposition is at new kind of entity. It is a hybrid between pure 



186 Discussions and Applications 

potentialities and actualities. A 'singular' proposition is the potentiality 
of an actual world including a definite set of actual entities in a nexus of 
reactions involving the hypothetical ingression of a definite set of eternal 
objects. 

A 'general' proposition only differs from a 'singular' proposition by the 
generalization of 'one definite set of [283] actual entities' into "any set 
belonging to a certain sort of sets.' If the sort of sets includes all sets with 
potentiality for that nexus of reactions, the proposition is called 'universal.' 

For the sake of simplicity, we will confine attention to singular propo- 
sitions; although a slight elaboration of explanation will easily extend the 
discussion to include general and universal propositions. 

The definite set of actual entities involved are called the 'logical sub- 
jects of the proposition'; and the definite set of eternal objects involved 
are called the 'predicates of the proposition.' The predicates define a 
potentiality of relatedness for the subjects. The predicates form one com- 
plex eternal object: this is 'the complex predicate.' The 'singular' propo- 
sition is the potentiality of this complex predicate finding realization in 
the nexus of reactions between the logical subjects, with assigned stations 
in the pattern for the various logical subjects. 

In a proposition the various logical subjects involved are impartially 
concerned. The proposition is no more about one logical subject than an- 
other logical subject. But according to the ontological principle, every 
proposition must be somewhere. The 'locus' of a proposition consists of 
those actual occasions whose actual worlds include the logical subjects 
of the proposition. When an actual entity belongs to the locus of a propo- 
sition, then conversely the proposition is an element in the lure for feeling 
of that actual entity. If by the decision of the concrescence, the proposi- 
tion has been admitted into feeling, then the proposition constitutes what 
the feeling has felt. The proposition constitutes a lure for a member of 
its locus by reason of the germaneness of the complex predicate to the 
logical subjects, having regard to forms of definiteness in the actual world 
of that member, and to its antecedent phases of feeling. 

The interest in logic, dominating overintellectualized philosophers, has 
obscured the main function of propositions in the nature of things. They 
are not primarily [284] for belief, but for feeling at the physical level of 
unconsciousness. They constitute a source for the origination of feeling 
which is not tied down to mere datum. A proposition is 'realized' by a 
member of its locus, when it is admitted into feeling. 

There are two types of relationship between a proposition and the actual 
world of a member of its locus. The proposition may be conformal or 
non-con formal to the actual world, true or false. 

When a conformal proposition is admitted into feeling, the reaction 
to the datum has simply resulted in the conformation of feeling to fact, 
with some emotional accession or diminution, by which the feelings in- 



The Propositions 187 

herent in alien fact are synthesized in a new individual valuation. The 
prehension of the proposition has abruptly emphasized one form of defi- 
niteness illustrated in fact. 

When a non-conformal proposition is admitted into feeling, the re- 
action to the datum has resulted in the synthesis of fact with the alterna- 
tive potentiality of the complex predicate. A novelty has emerged into 
creation. The novelty may promote or destroy order; it may be good or 
bad. But it is new, a new type of individual, and not merely a new inten- 
sity of individual feeling. That member of the locus has introduced a new 
form into the actual world; or,t at least, an old form in a new function. 

The conception of propositions as merely material for judgments is fatal 
to any understanding of their role in the universe. In that purely logical 
aspect, non-conformal propositions aret merely wrong, and therefore worse 
than useless. But in their primary role, they pave the way along which 
the world advances into novelty. Error is the price which we pay for 
progress. 

The term 'proposition' suits these hybrid entities, t provided that we 
substitute the broad notion of 'feeling' for the narrower notions of 'judg- 
ment' and 'belief/ A proposition is an element in the objective lure pro- 
posed for feeling, and when admitted into feeling it constitutes [2851 what 
is felt. The 'imaginative' feeling (cf. Part III) of a proposition is one of 
the ways of feeling it; and intellectual belief is another way oft feeling the 
proposition, a way which presupposes imaginative feeling. Judgment is 
the decision admitting a proposition into intellectual belief. 

Anyone who at bedtime consciously reviews the events of the day is 
subconsciously projecting them against the penumbral welter of alterna- 
tives. He is also unconsciously deciding feelings so as to maximize his pri- 
mary feeling, and to secure its propagation beyond his immediate present 
occasion. In considering the life-history of occasions, forming the historic 
route of an enduring physical object, there are three possibilities as to the 
subjective aims which dominate the internal concrescence of the separate 
occasions. Either (i), the satisfactions f of the antecedent occasions may 
be uniform with each other, and each internally without discord or incite- 
ment to novelty. In such a case, apart from novel discordance introduced 
by the environment, there is the mere conformal transformation of the 
feeling belonging to the datum into the identical feeling belonging to the 
immediate subject. Such pure conformation involves the exclusion of all 
the contraries involved in the lure, with their various grades of proximity 
and remoteness. This is an absolute extreme of undifferentiated endurance, 
of which we have no direct evidence. In every instance for which we can 
analyse, however imperfectly, the formal constitutions of successive oc- 
casions, these constitutions are characterized by contraries supervening 
upon the aboriginal data, butt with a regularity of alternation which pro- 
cures stability in the life-history. Contrast is thus gained. Tn physical sci- 



188 Discussions and Applications 

ence, this is vibration/ This is the main character of the life-histories of 
an inorganic physical object, stabilized in type. 

Or (ii), there is a zest for the enhancement of some dominant element 
of feeling, received from the data, enhanced by decision admitting non- 
conformation of [286] conceptual feeling to other elements in the data, 
and culminating in a satisfaction transmitting enhancement of the dom- 
inant element by reason of novel contrasts and inhibitions. Such a life-history 
involves growth dominated by a single final end. This is the main character 
of a physical object in process of growth. Such physical objects are mainly 
'organic/ so far as concerns our present knowledge of the world. 

Or (iii), there is a zest for the elimination of all dominant elements of 
feeling, received from the data. In such a case, the route soon loses its 
historic individuality. It is the case of decay. 

The first point to be noticed is that the admission of the selected ele- 
ments in the lure, as felt contraries, primarily generates purpose; it then 
issues in satisfaction; and satisfaction qualifies the efficient causation. But 
a felt 'contrary' is consciousness in germ. When the contrasts and identi- 
ties of such feelings are themselves felt, we have consciousness. It is the 
knowledge of ideas, in Locke's sense of that term. Consciousness requires 
more than the mere entertainment of theory. It is the feeling of the con- 
trast of theory, as mere theory, with fact, as mere fact. This contrast holds 
whether or no the theory be correct. 

A proposition, in abstraction from any particular actual entity which 
may be realizing it in feeling, is a manner of germaneness of a certain 
set of eternal objects to a certain set of actual entities. Every proposition 
presupposes those actual entities which are its logical subjects. It also pre- 
supposes certain definite actual entities, or a certain type of actual entities,! 
within a wide systematic nexus. In an extreme case, this nexus may com- 
prise any actual entity whatsoever. 

The presupposed logical subjects may not be in the actual world of 
some actual entity. In this case, the proposition does not exist for that 
actual entity. The pure concept of such a proposition refers in the hypo- 
thetical future beyond that actual entity. The propo- [287] sition itself awaits 
its logical subjects. Thus propositions grow with the creative advance of the 
world. They are neither pure potentials, nor pure actualities; they are a 
manner of potential nexus involving pure potentials and pure actualities. 
They are a new type of entities. Entities of this impure type presuppose 
the two pure types of entities. 

The primary mode of realization of a proposition in an actual entityt 
is not by judgment, but by entertainment. A proposition is entertained 
when it is admitted into feeling. Horror, relief, purpose, are primarily 
feelings involving the entertainment of propositions. 

In conclusion, there are four main types of entities in the universe, of 
which two are primary types and two are hybrid types. The primary types 
are actual entities and pure potentials (eternal objects); the hybrid types 



The Propositions 189 

are feelings and propositions (theories). Feelings are the 'real' components 
of actual entities. Propositions are only realizable as one sort of 'objective' 
datum for feelings. 

The primary element in the 'lure for feeling' is the subject's prehension 
of the primordial nature of God. Conceptual feelings are generated, and 
by integration with physical feelings a subsequent phase of prepositional 
feelings supervenes. The lure for feeling develops with the concrescent 
phases of the subject in question. I have spoken of it elsewhere (cf. Science 
and the\ Modern World, Ch. XI). 

It is this realized extension of eternal relatedness beyond the mutual 
relatedness of the actual occasions which prehends into each occasion 
the full sweep of eternal relatedness. I term this abrupt* realization 
the 'graded envisagement' which each occasion prehends into its syn- 
thesis. This gradedt envisagement is how the actual includes what 
(in one sense) is 'not-being' as a positive factor in its own achieve- 
ment. It is the source of error, of truth, of art, of ethics, and of re- 
ligion. By it, fact is confronted with alternatives. [288] 

SECTION lit 

All metaphysical theories which admit a disjunction between the 
component elements of individual experience on the one hand.t and on the 
other hand the component elements of the external world, must inevitably 
run into difficulties over the truth and falsehood of propositions, and 
over the grounds for judgment. The former difficulty is metaphysical, the 
latter epistemological. But all difficulties as to first principles are only 
camouflaged metaphysical difficulties. Thus also the epistemological dif- 
ficulty is only solvable by an appeal to ontology. The first difficulty poses 
the question as to the account of truth and falsehood, and the second 
difficulty poses the question as to the account of the intuitive perception 
of truth and falsehood. The former concerns propositions, the latter con- 
cerns judgments. There is a togetherness of the component elements in 
individual experience. This 'togetherness' has that special peculiar meaning 
of 'togetherness in experience.' It is a togetherness of its own kind, ex- 
plicable by reference to nothing else. For the purpose of this discussion 
it is indifferent whether we speak of a 'stream' of experience, or of an 
'occasion' of experience. With the former alternative there is togetherness 
in the stream, and with the latter alternative there is togetherness in the 
occasion. In either case, there is the unique 'experiential togetherness.' 

The consideration of experiential togetherness raises the final metaphysi- 
cal question: whether there is any other meaning of 'togetherness.' The 
denial of any alternative meaning, that is to say, of any meaning not 
abstracted from the experiential meaning, is the 'subjectivist' doctrine. 
This reformed version of the subjecfivist doctrine is the doctrine of the 
philosophy of organism. 



190 Discussions and Applications 

The contrary doctrine, that there is a 'togetherness' not derivative from 
experiential togetherness, leads to the disjunction of the components of 
subjective experience from the community of the external world. This 
dis- [289] junction creates the insurmountable difficulty for epistemology. 
For intuitive judgment is concerned with togetherness in experience, and 
there is no bridge between togetherness in experience, and togetherness 
of the non-experiential sort. 

This difficulty is the point of Kant's 'transcendental' criticism. He 
adopted a subjectivist position, so that the temporal world was merely 
experienced. But according to his form of the subjectivist doctrine, in the 
Critique of Pure Reason, no element in the temporal world could itself 
be an experient. His temporal world, as in that Critique, was in its essence 
dead, phantasmal, phenomenal. Kant was a mathematical physicist, and 
his cosmological solution was sufficient for the abstractions to which math- 
ematical physics is confined. 

The difficulties of the subjectivist doctrine arise when it is combined 
with the 'sensationalist' doctrine concerning the analysis of the compo- 
nents which are together in experience. According to that analysis in such 
a component the only elements not stamped with the particularity of that 
individual 'occasion'— or 'stream'— of experience are universals such as 
'redness' or 'shape,' With the sensationalist assumption, or with any gen- 
eralization of that doctrine, so long as the elements in question are uni- 
versals, the only alternatives are, either Bradley's doctrine of a single ex- 
perient, the absolute, or Leibniz's doctrine of many windowless monads. 
Kant, in his final metaphysics, must either retreat to Leibniz, or advance 
to Bradley. Either alternative stamps experience with a certain air of 
illusoriness.t The Leibnizian solution can mitigate the illusoriness only 
by recourse to a pious dependence upon God. This principle was invoked 
by Descartes and by Leibniz, in order to help out their epistemology. It is 
a device very repugnant to a consistent rationality. The very possibility of 
knowledge should not be an accident of God's goodness; it should depend 
on the interwoven natures of things. After all, God's knowledge has equally 
to be explained. 

[290] The philosophy of organism admits the subjectivist doctrine (as 
here stated), but rejects the sensationalist doctrine: hence its doctrine of 
the objectification of one actual occasion in the experience of another 
actual occasion. Each actual entity is a throb of experience including the 
actual world within its scope. The problems of efficient causation and of 
knowledge receive a common explanation by reference to the texture of 
actual occasions. The theory of judgment in the philosophy of organism 
can equally well be described as a 'correspondence' theory or as a 'coher- 
ence' theory. It is a correspondence theory, because it describes judgment 
as the subjective form of the integral prehension of the conformity, or of the 
non-conformity, of at proposition and an objectified nexus. The prehen- 
sion in question arises from the synthesis of two prehensions, one physical 



The Propositions 191 

and the other mental. The physical prehension is the prehension of the 
nexus of objectified actual occasions. The mental prehension is the pre- 
hension of the proposition. This latter prehension is necessarily 'impure/ 
and it arises from a history of antecedent synthesis whereby a pure con- 
ceptual prehension transfers its datum as a predicate of hypothetical re- 
latedness for the actualities in the datum of some physical prehension 
(cf. Part III). But the origination of a propositional prehension does not 
concern us in this description of judgment. The sole point is the synthesis 
of a physical prehension and propositional prehension into an 'intellectual' 
prehension (cf. Part III) whose subjective form involves judgment. 

This judgment is concerned with a conformity of two components 
within one experience. It is thus a 'coherence' theory. It is also concerned 
with the conformity of a proposition, not restricted to that individual ex- 
perience, with a nexus whose relatedness is derived from the various ex- 
periences of its own members and not from that of the judging experient.t 
In this sense there is a 'correspondence' theory. But, at this point of the 
argument, a distinction must be made. We shall say that a [291] proposi- 
tion can be true or false, and that a judgment can be correct, or incorrect, 
or suspended. With this distinction we see that there is a 'correspondence' 
theory of the truth and falsehood of propositions, and a 'coherence' theory 
of the correctness, incorrectness and suspensiont of judgments. 

In the 'organic' doctrine, a clear distinction between a judgment and 
a proposition has been made. A judgment is a feeling in the 'process' of 
the judging subject, and it is correct or incorrect respecting that subject. 
It enters, as a value, into the satisfaction of that subject; and it can only 
be criticized by the judgments of actual entities in the future. A judgment 
concerns the universe in process of prehension by the judging subject. It 
will primarily concern a definite selection of objectified actual entities, and 
of eternal objects; and it affirms the physical objectification— for the judg- 
ing subject— of those actual entities by the ingression of those eternal ob- 
jects; so that there is one objectified nexus of those actual entities, judged 
to be really interconnected, and qualified, by those eternal objects. This 
judgment affirms, correctly or incorrectly, a real fact in the constitution of 
the judging subject. Here there is no room for any qualification of the 
categorical character of the judgment. The judgment is made about itself 
by the judging subject, and is at feeling in the constitution of the judging 
subject. The actual entities, with which the judgment is explicitly con- 
cerned, comprise the 'logical' subjects of the judgment, and the selected 
eternal objects form the 'qualities' and 'relations' which are affirmed of 
the logical subjects. 

This affirmation about the logical subjects is obviously 'affirmation' in a 
sense derivative from the meaning of 'affirmation' about the judging sub- 
ject. Identification of the two senses will lead to error. In the latter** sense 
there is abstraction from the judging subject. The subjectivist principle 
has been transcended, and the judgment has shifted its emphasis from 



192 Discussions and Applications 

the objectified nexus [292] to the truth-value of the proposition in ques- 
tion. Having regard to the fact that judgment concerns the subjective form 
of an impure feeling arising from the integration of simpler feelings, we 
note that judgments are divisible into two sorts. These are (i) intuitive 
judgments and (ii) derivative judgments. In an intuitive judgment the 
integration of the physical datum with the proposition elicits into feeling 
the full complex detail of the proposition in its comparison of identity, 
or diversity, in regard to the complex detail of the physical datum. The 
intuitive judgment is the consciousness of this complex detailed com- 
parison involving identity and diversity. Such a judgment is in its nature 
correct. For it is the consciousness of what is. 

In a derivative judgment the integration of the physical datum with 
the proposition elicits into feeling the full complex detail of the proposi- 
tion, but does not elicit into feeling the full comparison of this detail with 
the complex detail of the physical fact. There is some comparison involv- 
ing the remainder of the detail. But the subjective form embraces the 
totality of the proposition, instead of assuming a complex pattern which 
discriminates between the compared and the uncompared components. In 
derivative judgments there can be error. Logic is the analysis of the rela- 
tionships between propositions in virtue of which derivative judgments 
will not introduce errors, other than those already attaching to the judg- 
ments in+ the premises. Most judgments are derivative; such judgments 
illustrate the doctrine that the subjective form of a feeling is affected by 
the totality of the actual occasion. This has been termed the 'sensitivity' of 
feelings in one occasion. In an intuitive judgment the subjective form of 
assent or dissent has been restrained, so as to derive its character solely 
from the contrasts in the datum. Even in this case, the emotional force of 
the judgment, as it passes into purpose, is derived from the whole judging 
subject 

Further, the judging subject and the logical subjects [293] refer to a uni- 
verse with the general metaphysical character which represents its 'pa- 
tience' for those subjects, and also its 'patience' for those eternal objects. 
In each judgment the universe is ranged in a hierarchy of wider and wider 
societies, as explained above (cf. Part II, Ch. III). It follows that the 
distinction between the logical subjects, with their qualities and relations, 
and the universe as systematic background, is not quite so sharply defined 
as the previous explanation suggests. For it is a matter of convention as 
to which of the proximate societies are reckoned as logical subjects and 
which as background. Another way of stating this shading off of logical 
subjects into background t is to say that the patience of the universe for a 
real fact in a judging subject is a hierarchical patience involving systematic 
gradations of character. This discussion substantiates the statement made 
above (cf. Part I, Ch. I, Sect. V), that a verbal statement is never the full 
expression of a proposition. 

We now recur to the distinction between a proposition and a judgment. 



The Propositions 193 

A proposition emerges in the analysis of a judgment; it is the datum of 
the judgment in abstraction from the judging subject and from the sub- 
jective form. A judgment x is a synthetic feeling, embracing two subordinate 
feelings in one unity of feeling. Of these subordinate feelings one is propo- 
sitional, merely entertaining the proposition which is its datum. The same 
proposition can constitute the content of diverse judgments by diverse 
judging entities respectively. The possibility of diverse judgments by di- 
verse actual entities, having the same content (of 'proposition' in con- 
trast with 'nexus'), requires that the same complex of logical subjects, ob- 
jectified via the same eternal objects, can enter as a partial constituent 
into the 'real' essences of diverse actual entities. The judgment is a de- 
cision of feeling, the proposition is what is felt; but it is only part of the 
datum felt. 

But, since each actual world is relative to standpoint, [294] it is only 
some actual entities which will have the standpoints so as to include,! in 
their actual world, the actual entities which constitute the logical subjects 
of the proposition. Thus every proposition defines the judging subjects 
for which it is a proposition. Every proposition presupposes some definite 
settled actual entities in the actual world of its judging subject; and thus 
its possible judging subjects must have these actual entities in the actual 
world of each of them. All judgment requires knowledge of the pre- 
supposed actual entities. Thus in addition to the requisite composition of 
the actual world presupposed by a proposition, there must be the requi- 
site knowledge of that world presupposed by a judgment, whether the 
judgment be correct or incorrect. For actual entities, whose actual worlds 
have not the requisite composition, the proposition is non-existent; for 
actual entities, without the requisite knowledge, the judgment is im- 
possible. It is quite true that a more abstract proposition can be modelled 
on the lines of the original proposition, so as to avoid the presupposition of 
some or all of these settled actual entities which are the logical subjects 
in the original proposition. This new proposition will have meaning for a 
wider group of possible subjects than the original proposition. Some propo- 
sitions seem to us to have meaning for all possible judging subjects. This 
may be the case; but I do not dare to affirm that our metaphysical capac- 
ities are sufficiently developed to warrant any certainty on this question. 
Perhaps we are always presupposing some wide society beyond which our 
imaginations cannot leap. But the vagueness of verbal statements is such 
that the same form of words is taken to represent a whole set of allied 
propositions of various grades of abstractness. 

A judgment weakens or strengthens the decision whereby the judged 
proposition, as a constituent in the lure, is admitted as an efficient element 
m the concrescence, with the reinforcement of knowledge. A judgment is 
the critique of a lure for feeling. 

1 Cf. Part III, Ch. V.f 



194 Discussions and Applications 



SECTION III 

[295] It now remains to consider the sense in which the actual world, 
in some systematic aspect, enters into each proposition. This investigation 
is wholly concerned with the notion of the logical subjects of the proposi- 
tion. These logical subjects are, in the old sense of the term, 'particulars.' 
They are not concepts in comparison with other concepts; they are par- 
ticular facts in a potential pattern. 

But particulars must be indicated; because the proposition concerns just 
those particulars and no others. Thus the indication belongs to the propo- 
sition; namely, 'Those particulars as thus indicated in such-and-such a 
predicative pattern' constitutes the proposition. Apart from the indication 
there is no proposition because there are no determinate particulars. Thus 
we have to study the theory of indication. 

Some definitions are required: 

A 'relation' between occasions is an eternal object illustrated in the 
complex of mutual prehensions by virtue of which those occasions con- 
stitute a nexus. 

A relation is called a 'dual relation' when the nexus in which it is real- 
ized consists of two, and only two, actual occasions. It is a 'triple relation' 
when there are three occasions, and so on. 

There will, in general, be an indefinite number of eternal objects thus 
illustrated in the mutual prehensions of the occasions of any one nexus; 
that is to say, there are an indefinite number of relations realized between 
the occasions of any particular nexus. 

A 'general principle' is an eternal object which is only illustrated through 
its 'instances,' which are also eternal objects. Thus the realization of an 
instance is also the realization of the general principle of which that eter- 
nal object is an instance. But the converse is not true; namely, the realiza- 
tion of the general principle does not involve the realization of any par- 
ticular instance, though [296] it does necessitate the realization of some 
instance. Thus the instances each involve the general principle, but the 
general principle only involves at least one instance. In general, the in- 
stances of a general principle are mutually exclusive, so that the realiza- 
tion of one instance involves the exclusion of the other instances. For 
example, colour is a general principle and colours are the instances. So if 
all sensible bodies exhibit the general principle, which is colour, each body 
exhibits some definite colour. Also each body exhibiting a definite colour 
is thereby 'coloured.' 

A nexus exhibits an 'indicative system' of dual relations among its mem- 
bers, when (i) one, and only one, relation of the system relates each pair 
of its members; and (ii) these relations are instances of a general prin- 
ciple; and (iii) the relation (in the system) between any member A and 
anv other member B does not also relate A and a member of the nexus 



The Propositions 195 

other than B; and (iv) the relations (in the system) between A and B 
and between A and C suffice to define the relation (in the system) be- 
tween B and C, where A, B, and C are any three members of the nexus. 

Thus if A and X be any two members of the nexus, and if X has knowl- 
edge of A's systematic relation to it and also of A's systematic relations to 
B ? C, and D, where B, C, and D are members of the nexus, then X has 
knowledge of its own systematic relations to B, C, and D, and of the 
mutual systematic relations between B, C, and D. Such a nexus admits of 
the precise indication of its members from the standpoint of any one of 
them. The relative where' presupposes a nexus exhibiting an indicative 
system. More complex types of indicative systems can be defined; but the 
simplest type suffices to illustrate the principle involved. We have been 
defining Aristotle's category of 'position/ It will be noticed that in a nexus 
with an indicative system of relations, the subjective aspect of experience 
can be eliminated from propositions involved. For a knowledge of B and 
C and D as from A [297] yields a proposition concerning C and D as from 
B. Thus the prevalent notion, that the particular subject of experience can, 
in the nature of the case, never be eliminated from the experienced fact, 
is quite untrue. 

Every proposition presupposes some general nexus with an indicative 
relational system. This nexus includes its locus of judging subjects and 
also its logical subjects. This presupposition is part of the proposition, and 
the proposition cannot be entertained by any subject for which the pre- 
supposition is not valid. Thus in a proposition certain characteristics are 
presupposed for the judging subject and for the logical subjects. This pre- 
supposition of character can be carried further than the mere requirements 
of indication require. For example, in 'Socrates is mortal' the mere spatio- 
temporal indicative system may be sufficient to indicate 'Socrates/ But 
the proposition may mean 'The man Socrates is mortal/ or 'The philoso- 
pher Socrates is mortal/ The superfluous indication may be part of the 
proposition. Anyhow, the principle that a proposition presupposes the 
actual world as exhibiting some systematic aspect has now been explained. 

This discussion can be illustrated by the proposition, 'Caesar has crossed 
the Rubicon/ This form of words symbolizes an indefinite number of di- 
verse propositions. In its least abstract form 'Caesar stands for a society of 
settled actual entities in the actual world from the standpoint of the judg- 
ing subject, with their objectifications consciously perceived by the sub- 
ject. The whole theory of perception will come up for further discussion 
in a later chapter (cf. Part III); at this point it can be assumed. The word 
'Rubicon' is to be explained in the same way as the word 'Caesar/ The 
only points left ambiguous respecting 'Caesar' and 'Rubicon' are that 
these societies— either or both, and each with its defining characteristic- 
may be conjecturally supposed to be prolonged up to the world contem- 
porary with the judging subject, or, even more conjecturally, into the 
future [298] world beyond the subject. The past tense of the word 'has' 



196 Discussions and Applications 

shows that this point of ambiguity is irrelevant, so that the proposition can 
be framed so as to ignore it. But it need not be so framed: one of Caesar's 
old soldiers may in later years have sat on the bank of the river and medi- 
tated on the assassination of Caesar, and on Caesar's passage over the 
little river tranquilly flowing before his gaze. This would have been a 
different proposition from the more direct one which I am now consider- 
ing. Nothing could better illustrate the hopeless ambiguity of language; 
since both propositions fit the same verbal phraseology. There is yet a 
third proposition: a modern traveller sitting on the bank of the Rubicon, 
and meditating on his direct perceptions of actual occasions can locate, 
relatively to himself by spatio-temporal specifications, an event which 
inferentially and conjecturally he believes to include a portion of the past 
history of the Rubicon as directly known to him. He also, by an analogous 
process of inference and conjecture, and of spatio-temporal specification, 
locates relatively to himself another event which he believes to contain 
the life of Caesar of whom he has no direct knowledge. The proposition 
meditated on by this traveller sitting on the bank of the modern river is 
evidently a different proposition to that in the mind of Caesar's old soldier. 
Then there is the proposition which might have been in the mind of one 
of the crowd who listened to Antony's speech, a man who had seen Caesar 
and not the Rubicon. 

It is obvious that in this way an indefinite number of highly special 
propositions can be produced, differing from each other by fine gradations. 
Everything depends upon the differences in direct perceptive knowledge 
which these various propositions presuppose for their subjects. But there 
are propositions of at more general type, for which 'Caesar' and 'Rubicon' 
have more generalized, vaguer meanings. In these vaguer meanings. 'Caesar' 
and 'Rubicon' indicate the entities, if any, located by any one member of 
a type of routes, starting from a [299] certain type of inference and con- 
jecture. Also there are some such propositions in which the fact of there 
being such entities, to be thus located, is part of the content whereby the 
judgment is true or false; and there are other propositions in which even 
this requisite is evaded, so far as truth or falsehood is concerned. It is by 
reason of these various types of more abstract propositions that we can 
conceive the hypothetical existence of the more special propositions which 
for some of us, as judging subjects, would be meaningless. 

This discussion should show the futility of taking any verbal statement, 
such as 'Caesar has crossed the Rubicon/ and arguing about the meaning. 
Also any proposition, which satisfies the verbal form so as to be one of its 
possibilities of meaning, defines its own locus of subjects; and only for 
such subjects is there the possibility of a judgment whose content is that 
proposition. 

A proposition is the potentiality of the objectification of certain pre- 
supposed actual entities via certain qualities and relations, the objectifi- 
cation being for some unspecified subject for which the presupposition has 



The Propositions 197 

meaning in direct experience. The judgment is the conscious affirmation 
by a particular subject— for which the presupposition holds— that this 
potentiality is, or is not, realized for it. It must be noticed that 'realized' 
does not mean 'realized in direct conscious experience/ but does mean 
'realized as being contributory to the datum out of which that judging 
subject originates/ Since direct t conscious experience is usually absent, a 
judgment can be erroneous. 

Thus a proposition is an example of what Locke calls an 'idea deter- 
mined to particular existences/ It is the potentiality of such an idea; the 
realized idea, admitted to decision in a given subject, is the judgment, 
which may be a true or false idea about the particular things. The discus- 
sion of this question must be resumed (cf. Part III) when conceptual 
activity is examined. But it is evident that a proposition is a complex 
entity which [300] stands between the eternal objects and the actual oc- 
casions. Compared to eternal objects a proposition shares in the concrete 
particularity of actual occasions; and compared to actual occasions a propo- 
sition shares in the abstract generality of eternal objects. Finally, it must 
be remembered that propositions enter into experience in other ways than 
through judgment-feelings. + 



SECTION IV 

A metaphysical proposition— in the proper, general sense of the termt 
'metaphysical— signifies a proposition which (i) has meaning for any- 
actual occasion, as a subject entertaining it, and (ii) is 'general/ in the 
sense that its predicate potentially relates any and every set of actual oc- 
casions, providing the suitable number of logical subjects for the predi- 
cative pattern, and (iii) has a 'uniform' truth-value, in the sense that, by 
reason of its form and scope, its truth-value is identical with the truth- 
value of each of the singular propositions to be obtained by restricting the 
application of the predicate to any one set of logical subjects. It is obvious 
that, if a metaphysical proposition be true, the third condition is un- 
necessary. For a general proposition can only be true if this condition be 
fulfilled. But if the general proposition be false, then it is only metaphysical 
when in addition each of the derivate singular propositions is false. The 
general proposition would be false, if any one of the derivate singular 
propositions were false. But the third condition is expressed in the propo- 
sition without any dependence upon the determination of the proposition's 
truth or falsehood. 

There can be no cosmic epoch for which the singular propositions de- 
rived from a metaphysical proposition differ in truth-valuet from those of 
any other cosmic epoch. 

We certainly think that we entertain metaphysical propositions: but, 
having regard to the mistakes of the past respecting the principles of 
geometry, it is wise to [30 J] reserve some scepticism on this point The 



198 Discussions and Applications 

propositions which seem to be most obviously metaphysical are the arith- 
metical theorems. I will therefore illustrate the justification both for the 
belief, and for the residual scepticism, by an examination of one of the 
simplest of such theorems: One and one make two. 2 

Certainly, this proposition, construed in the sense 'one entity and an- 
other entity make two entities/" seems to be properly metaphysical without 
any shadow of limitation upon its generality, or truth. But we must hesi- 
tate even here, when we notice that it is usually asserted, with equal con- 
fidence as to the generality of its metaphysical truth, in a sense which is 
certainly limited, and sometimes untrue. In our reference to the actual 
world, we rarely consider an individual actual entity. The objects of our 
thoughts are almost always societies, or looser groups of actual entities. 
Now, for the sake of simplicity, consider a society of the 'personal' type. 
Such a society will be a linear succession of actual occasions forming a 
historical route in which some defining characteristic is inherited by each 
occasion from its predecessors. A society of this sort is an 'enduring ob- 
ject/ Probably, a simple enduring object is simpler than anything which 
we ordinarily perceive or think about. It is the simplest type of society; 
and for any duration of its existence it requires that its environment be 
largely composed of analogous simplef enduring objects. What we nor- 
mally consider is the wider society in which many strands of enduring 
objects are to be found, a 'corpuscular society/ 

Now consider two distinct enduring objects. They will be easier to 
think about if their defining characteristics are different. We will call these 
defining characteristics a and b y and also will use these letters, a and b, 
as the names of the two enduring objects. Now the proposition 'one entity 
and another entity make two [302] entities' is usually construed in the 
sense that, given two enduring objects, any act of attention which con- 
sciously comprehends an actual occasion from each of the two historic 
routes will necessarily discover two actual occasions, one from each of the 
two distinct routes. For example, suppose that a cup and a saucer are two 
such enduring objects, which of course they are not; we always assume 
that, so long as they are both in existence and are sufficiently close to be 
seen in one glance, any act of attention, whereby we perceive the cup and 
perceive the saucer, will thereby involve the perception of two actual en- 
tities, one the cup in one occasion of its existence and the other the saucer 
in one occasion of its existence. There can be no reasonable doubt as to 
the truth of this assumption in this particular example. But in making 
it, we are very far from the metaphysical proposition from which we 
started. We are in fact stating a truth concerning the wide societies of 
entities amid which our lives are placed. It is a truth concerning this 
cosmos, but not a metaphysical truth. 

Let us return to the two truly simple enduring objects, a and b. Also 

2 For the proof of this proposition, cf. Principia Mathematical Vol. II, 
*110.643. 



The Propositions 199 

let us assume that their defining characteristics, a and b, are not con- 
traries, so that both of them can qualify the same actual occasion. Then 
there is no general metaphysical reason why the distinct routes of a and b 
should not intersect in at least one actual occasion. Indeed, having regard 
to the extreme generality of the notion of a simple enduring object, it is 
practically certain that— with the proper choice for the defining character- 
istics, a and b— intersecting historic routes for a and b must have fre- 
quently come into existence. In such a contingency a being who could 
consciously distinguish the two distinct enduring objects a and b, so as 
to have knowledge of their distinct defining characteristics and their dis- 
tinct historic routes, might find a and b exemplified in one actual entity. 
It is as though the cup and the saucer were at one instant identical; and 
then, later on, resumed their distinct existence. 

[303] We hardly ever apply arithmetic in its pure metaphysical sense, 
without the addition of presumptions which depend for their truth on the 
character of the societies dominating the cosmic epoch in which we live. 
It is hardly necessary to draw attention to the fact, that ordinary verbal 
statements make no pretence of discriminating the different senses in which 
an arithmetical statement can be understood. 

There is no difficulty in imagining a world— i.e., a cosmic epoch— in 
which arithmetic would be an interesting fanciful topic for dreamers, but 
useless for practical people engrossed in the business of life. In fact, we 
seem to have been only barely rescued from such a state of things. For 
amid the actual occasions located in the wilds of so-called 'empty space/ 
and well removed from the enduring objects which go to form the en- 
during material bodies, it is quite probable that the contemplation of 
arithmetic would not direct attention to any very important relations of 
things. It is, of course, a mere speculation that any actual entity, occurring 
in such an environment of faintly coordinated achievement, achieves the 
intricacy of constitution required for conscious mental operations. 

SECTION V 

We ask the metaphysical question, What is there in the nature of 
things, whereby an inductive inference, or a judgment of general truth, 
can be significantly termed 'correct' or Incorrect'? For example, we believe 
now— July 1, 1927— that the railway time-tables for the United States, 
valid for the previous months of May and June, represent the facts as to 
the past running of the trains, within certain marginal limits of unpunc- 
tuality, and allowing for a few individual breakdowns. Also we believe 
that the current time-tables for July will be exemplified, subject to the 
same qualifications. On the evidence before us our beliefs are justified, 
provided that we introduce into our judgments some estimate of the 
[304] high probability which is all that we mean to affirm. If we are con- 
sidering astronomical events, our affirmations will include an estimate of 



200 Discussions and Applications 

a higher probability. Though even here some margin of uncertainty may 
exist The computers of some famous observatory may have made an un- 
precedented error; or some unknown physical law may have important 
relevance to the condition of the star mainly concerned, leading to its 
unexpected explosion. 3 

This astronomical contingency, and the beliefs which cluster round it, 
have been stated with some detail, because— as thus expressed— they 
illustrate the problem as it shapes itself in philosophy. Also the example 
of the railway time-tables illustrates another point. For it is possible 
momentarily, in Vermont on July 1, 1927, to forget that the unprecedented 
Mississippi floods happened during that May and June; so that although 
the estimate as to error in punctuality was justified by the evidence con- 
sciously before us, it did not in fact allow for the considerable derange- 
ment of the traffic in some states in the Union. 4 The point of this illus- 
tration from railway trains is that there is a conformity to matter of fact 
which these judgments exhibit, even if the events concerned have not 
happened, or will not happen. These considerations introduce the funda- 
mental principle concerning 'judgment/ It is that all judgment is categor- 
ical; it concerns a proposition true or false in its application to the actual 
occasion which is the subject making the judgment. This doctrine is not 
so far from Bradley's doctrine of judgment, as explained in his Logic. 
According to Bradley, the ultimate subject of every judgment is the one 
ultimate substance, the absolute. Also, according to him, the judging 
subject is a mode of the absolute, self-contradictory if taken to be inde- 
pendently actual. For Bradley, the judging subject has only a [305] deriva- 
tive actuality, which is the expression of its status as an affection of the 
absolute. Thus,! in Bradley's doctrine, a judgment is an operation by which 
the absolute, under the limitations of one of its affections, enjoys self- 
consciousness of its enjoyment of affections. It will be noticed that in 
this bald summary of Bradley's position, I am borrowing Spinoza's phrase, 
'affeciiones substantial 

In the philosophy of organism, an actual occasion—as has been stated 
above— is the whole universe in process of attainment of a particular 
satisfaction. Bradley's doctrine of actuality is simply inverted. The final 
actuality is the particular process with its particular attainment of satis- 
faction. The actuality of the universe is merely derivative from its soli- 
darity in each actual entity. It must be held that judgment concerns the 
universe as objectified from the standpoint of the judging subject. It con- 
cerns the universe through that subject. 

With this doctrine in mind, we pass to the discussion of the sense in 
which probability can be a positive fact in an actual entity; so that a propo- 

8 Since this sentence was written in July, 1927, a star has unexpectedly split 
in two, in March, 1928. 

4 Still less, at the time of writing this sentence, were the Vermont floods of 
November, 1927, foreseen. 



The Propositions 201 

sition expressing the probability of some other proposition can in this 
respect agree or disagree with the constitution of the judging entity. The 
notion of 'probability/ in the widest sense of that term, presents a puzzling 
philosophical problem. The mathematical theory of probability is based 
upon certain statistical assumptions. When these assumptions hold, the 
meaning of probability is simple; and the only remaining difficulties are 
concerned with the technical mathematical development. But it is not 
easy to understand how the statistical theory can apply to all cases to 
which the notion of more or less probability is habitually applied. For 
example, when we consider— as we do consider— the probability of some 
scientific conjecture as to the internal constitution of the stars, or as to 
the future of human society after some unprecedented convulsion, we 
seem to be influenced by some analogy which it is very difficult to convert 
into an appeal to any definite statistical fact. We may consider that it is 
probable [306] that the judgment could be justified by some statistical 
appeal, if we only knew where to look. This is the belief that the statistical 
probability is itself probable. But here, evidently, there is an appeal to a 
wider meaning of probability in order to support the statistical probability 
applicable to the present case. It is arguable that this wider probability 
is itself another statistical probability as to the existence of the special 
statistics relevant to such types of scientific argument. But in this explana- 
tion puzzling questions are accumulating; and it is impossible to avoid the 
suspicion that we are being put off with one of those make-believe ex- 
planations, so useful to reasoners who are wedded to a theory. The phi- 
losophy of organism provides two distinct elements in the universe from 
which an intuition of probability can originate. One of them is statistical. 
In this and the next two sections, + an attempt will be made to justify 
the statistical theory. It is therefore the more imperative to survey care- 
fully the difficulties which have to be met. 

In the first place, probability is always relative* to evidence; so, on 
the statistical theory, the numerical probability will mean the numerical 
ratio of favourable to unfavourable cases in the particular class of 'cases' 
selected as the 'ground 7 for statistical comparison. But alternative 'grounds' 
certainly exist. Accordingly we must provide a reason,f not based upon 
'probability/ why one 'ground' is selected rather than another. We may 
admit such a chain of vaguer and vaguer probabilities, in which our first 
ground is selected as statistically probable in respect to its superiority to 
other 'grounds' of other types. We are thus driven back to a second-order 
ground' of probability. We may logically proceed to third-order 'grounds/ 
and so on. But if the statistical theory is to be substantiated, after a finite 
number of steps we must reach a 'ground' which is not selected for any 
reason of probability. It must be selected because it is the 'ground' pre- 
supposed in all our reasonings. [307] Apart from some such ultimate 
'ground,' the statistical theory, viewed as an ultimate explanation for all 
our uses of the notion of 'probability/ must inevitably fail. This failure 



202 Discussions and Applications 

arises by reason of the complete arbitrariness of the ultimate 'ground' 
upon which the whole estimate of probability finally rests. 

Secondly, the primary requisite for a 'ground' suitable for statistical 
probability seems itself to appeal to probability. The members of the 
class, called the 'ground/ must themselves be 'cases of equal probability/ 
some favourable and some unfavourable, with the possibility of the limit- 
ing types of 'ground' in which all members are favourable, or all members 
are unfavourable. The proposition in question, whose probability is to be 
estimated, must be known to be a member of the 'ground'; but no other 
evidence, as to the set— favourable or unfavourable—to which t the propo- 
sition belongs, enters into consideration. It is evident that 7 for the ulti- 
mate ground, the phrase 'cases of equal probability' must be explicable 
without reference to any notion of probability. The principle of such an 
explanation is easily found by reference to the six faces of dice. A die is 
a given fact; and its faces do not differ, qua faces, in any circumstance 
relative to their fall with one face upwards or another face upwards. Also 
beyond this given fact, there is ignorance. Thus again we are driven to an 
ultimate fact: there must be an ultimate species, and the specific character 
must be irrelevant to the 'favourableness' or 'unfavourableness' of the 
members of the species in their capacity of cases. All this must be given 
in direct knowledge without any appeal to probability. Also there must 
be equally direct knowledge of the proportion of favourable or unfavour- 
able cases within the species— at least within the limits of precision or 
vagueness presupposed in the conclusion. 

Thirdly, it is another requisite for a 'ground' that the number of in- 
stances which it includes be finite. The whole theory of the ratios of car- 
dinal numbers, on which [308] statistical probability depends, breaks down 
when the cardinal numbers are infinite. 

Fourthly, the method of 'sampling' professes to evade two objections. 
One of them is the breakdown, mentioned above, when the number of 
cases in the ground' is infinite. The other objection, thus evaded, is that 
in practice the case in question is novel and does not belong to the 
'ground' which is in fact examined. According to this second objection, 
unless there is some further evidence, the statistical state of the 'ground' 
is bogus evidence as to the probability of the case in question. To sum 
up: The method of sampling professes to overcome! (i) the difficulty 
arising from the infinity of the ground; and (ii) that arising from the 
novelty of the case in question, whereby it does not belong to the ground 
examined. In the discussion it must be remembered that we are con- 
sidering that ultimate ground which must not require any appeal to prob- 
ability beyond itself. Thus the statistical facts as to the ground! must be 
'given' and not merely 'probable.' 

(i) When we have ant infinite 'ground/ containing an infinite number 
of favourable cases and an infinite number of unfavourable cases, 'random' 
sampling can give no help towards the establishment of statistical proba- 



The Propositions 203 

bility; for one reason because no such notion of ratios can apply to these 
infinities; and for another reason, no sample is 'random'; it has only fol- 
lowed a complex method. A finite number of samples each following some 
method of its own, however complex each method may be, will give a 
statistical result entirely dependent upon those methods. In so far as 
repetitions of so-called random samplings give concordant results, the only 
conclusion to be drawn is that there is a relevant, though concealed, anal- 
ogy between the 'random' methods. Thus a finite 'ground' is essential for 
statistical probability. It must be understood that this argument implies 
no criticism on a properly interpreted method of sampling applied to a 
finite 'ground/ 

[309] (ii) When the 'case' in question does not belong to the ground 
examined, theret can, apart from further information, be no rational in- 
ference from the 'ground' to the novel case. If probability be in truth 
purely statistical, and if there be no additional information, there can be 
no escape from this conclusion. But we certainly do unhesitatingly argue 
from a 'ground'' which does not include the case in question, to a probable 
conclusion concerning the case in question. Thus either such an inference 
is irrational, futile, useless; or, when there is justification, there is additional 
information. This is the famous dilemma which perplexes the theories of 
induction t and of probability. 

SECTION VI 

It is evident that the ultimate 'ground' to which all probable judgments 
must refer can be nothing else than the actual world as objectified in judg- 
ing subjects. A judging subject is always passing a judgment upon its own 
data. Thus, if the statistical theory is to hold, the relations between the 
judging subject and its data must be such as to evade the difficulties which 
beset that theory. 

Every actual entity is in its nature essentially social; and this in two 
ways. First, the outlines of its own character are determined by the data 
which its environment provides for its process of feeling. Secondly, these 
data are not extrinsic to the entity; they constitute that display of the 
universe which is inherent in the entity. Thus the data upon which the 
subject passes judgment are themselves components conditioning the 
character of the judging subject. It follows that any general presupposi- 
tion as to the character of the experiencing subject also implies a general 
presupposition as to the social environment providing the display for that 
subject. In other words, a species of subject requires a species of data as 
its preliminary phase of concrescence. But such data are nothing but the 
social environment under the [310] abstraction effected by objectification. 
Also the character of the abstraction itself depends on the environment. 
The species of data requisite for the presumed judging subject presupposes 
an environment of a certain social character. 



204 Discussions and Applications 

Thus, according to the philosophy of organism, inductive reasoning 
gains its validity by reason of a suppressed premise. This tacit presuppo- 
sition is that the particular future which is the logical subject of the 
judgment, inductively justified, shall include actualities which have close 
analogy to some contemporary subject enjoying assigned experience; for 
example, an analogy to the judging subject in question, or to some sort 
of actuality presupposed as in the actual world which is the logical subject 
of the inductive judgment. It is also presumed that this future is derived 
from the present by a continuity of inheritance in which this condition 
is maintained. There is thus the presupposition of the maintenance of the 
general social environment— -eft/ier by reference to judging subjects, or 
by more direct reference to the preservation of the general type of material 
world requisite for the presupposed character of one or more of the logical 
subjects of the proposition. 

In this connection, I can only repeat, as a final summary, a paragraph 
from my Science and the Modern World (Ch. Ill): 
You will observe that I do not hold induction to be in its essence the 
divinationt of general laws. It is the derivation of some characteristics 
of a particular future from the known characteristics of a particular 
past. The wider assumption of general laws holding for all cognizable 
occasions appears a very unsafe addendum to attach to this limited 
knowledge. All we can ask of the present occasion is that it shall 
determine a particular community of occasions, which are in some 
respects mutually qualified by reason of their inclusion within that 
same community. 
It is evident that, in this discussion of induction, the philosophy of or- 
ganism [311] appears as an enlargement of the premise in ethical discus- 
sions: that man is a social animal. Analogously, every actual occasion is 
social, so that when we have presumed the existence of any persistent type 
of actual occasions, we have thereby made presumptions as to types of 
societies comprised in its environment. Another way of stating this ex- 
planation of the validity of induction is, that in every forecast there is a 
presupposition of a certain type of actual entities, and that the question 
then asked is, Under what circumstances will these entities find them- 
selves? The reason that an answer can be given is that the presupposed 
type of entities requires a presupposed type of data for the primary phases 
of these actual entities; and that a presupposed type of data requires a 
presupposed type of social environment. But the laws of nature are the 
outcome of the social environment. Hence when we have presupposed a 
type of actual occasions, we have already some information as to the laws 
of nature in operation throughout the environment. 

In every inductive judgment, there is therefore contained a presupposi- 
tion of the maintenance of the general order of the immediate environ- 
ment, so far as concerns actual entities within the scope of the induction. 
The inductive judgment has regard to the statistical probabilities inherent 
in this given order. The anticipations are devoid of meaning apart from 



The Propositions 205 

the definite cosmic order which they presuppose. Also survival requires 
order, and to presuppose survival, apart from the type of order which that 
type of survival requires, is a contradiction. It is at this point that the 
organic philosophy differs from any form of Cartesian 'substance-philoso- 
phy/ For if a substance requires nothing but itself in order to exist, its 
survival can tell no tale as to the survival of order in its environment. Thus 
no conclusion can be drawn respecting the external relationships of the 
surviving substance to its future environment. For [312] the organic phi- 
losophy, anticipations as to the future of a piece of rock presuppose an 
environment with the type of order which that piece of rock requires. 
Thus the completely unknown environment never enters into an inductive 
judgment. The induction is about the statistical probabilities of this en- 
vironment, or about the graded relevance to it of eternal objects. 

Thus the appeal to the mere unknown is automatically ruled out. The 
question, as to what will happen to an unspecified entity in an unspecified 
environment, has no answer. Induction always cocerns societies of actual 
entities which are important for the stability of the immediate en- 
vironment. 



SECTION VII 

In the preceding section there has been a covert appeal to probability. 
It is the purpose of this section to explain how the probability, thus in- 
voked, can be explained according to the statistical theory. First, we have 
to note exactly where this appeal to probability enters into the notion of 
induction. An inductive argument always includes a hypothesis, namely, 
that the environment which is the subject-matter considered contains a 
society of actual occasions analogous to a society in the present. But 
analogous societies require analogous data for their several occasions; and 
analogous data can be provided only by the objectifications provided by 
analogous environments. But the laws of nature are derived from the 
characters of the societies dominating the environment. Thus the laws of 
nature dominating the environment in question have some analogy to 
the laws of nature dominating the immediate environment. 

Now the notions of 'analogy' and of 'dominance 7 both leave a margin 
of uncertainty. We can ask, How far analogous? and How far dominant? 
If there were exact analogy, and complete dominance, there would be a 
mixture of certainty as to general conditions and of complete ignorance 
as to specific details. But such a descrip- [313] tion does not apply either 
to our knowledge of the immediate present, or of the past, or to our in- 
ductive knowledge of the future. Our conscious experience involves a 
baffling mixture of certainty, ignorance, and probability. 

Now it is evident that the theory of cosmic epochs, due to the domi- 
nance of societies of actual occasions, provides the basis for a statistical 
explanation of probability. In any one epoch there are a definite set of 



206 Discussions and Applications 

dominant societies in certain ordered interconnections. There is also an 
admixture of chaotic occasions which cannot be classified as belonging to 
any society. But, having regard to the enornious extension of any cosmic 
epoch, we are practically dealing with infinities, so that some method of 
sampling is required, rooted in the nature of the case and not arbitrarily 
adopted. 

This natural method of sampling is provided by the data which form 
the primary phase of any one actual occasion. Each actual occasion ob- 
jectifies the other actual occasions in its environment. This environment 
can be limited to the relevant portion of the cosmic epoch. It is a finite 
region of the extensive continuum, so far as adequate importance is con- 
cerned in respect to individual differences among actual occasions. Also, 
in respect to the importance of individual differences, we may assume 
that there is a lower limit to the extension of each relevant occasion within 
this region. With these two presumptions, it follows that the relevant 
objectifications, forming the relevant data for any one occasion, refer to 
a finite sample of actual occasions in the environment. Accordingly our 
knowledge of the external world, and of the conditions upon which its 
laws depend, t is, through and through, of that numerical character which 
a statistical theory of probability requires. Such a theory does not require 
that exact statistical calculations bet made. All that is meant by such a 
theory is that our probability judgments are ultimately derivable from 
vague estimates of 'more or less' in a numerical sense. [314] We have an 
unprecise intuition of the statistical basis of the sort of way in which 
things happen. 

Note. — By far the best discussion of the philosophical theory of probability 
is to be found in Mr. }. Maynard Keynes' book, A Treatise on Probability. This 
treatise must long remain the standard work on the subject. My conclusions in 
this chapter do not seem to me to differ fundamentally from those of Mr. 
Keynes as set out towards the conclusion of his Chapter XXI. But Mr. Keynes 
here seems to revert to a view of probability very analogous to that form of the 
'frequency theory' which, as suggested by me,f he criticized acutely (and rightly, 
so far as concerned that special form) in his Chapter VIII. 

SECTION VIII 

So far the argument of the three! preceding sections has been devoted 
to the explanation of the statistical ground for a probability judgment. But 
the same discussion also discloses an alternative non-statistical ground for 
such a judgment. 

The main line of thought has been (i) that each actual occasion has at 
the base of its own constitution the environment from which it springs; 
(ii) that in this function of the environment abstraction has been made 
from its indefinite multiplicity of forms of definiteness, so as to obtain a 
concordant experience of the elements retained; (in) that any actual oc- 
casion belonging to an assigned species requires an environment adapted 



The Propositions 207 

to that species, so that the presupposition of a species involves a pre- 
supposition concerning the environment; (iv) that in every inductive judg- 
ment, and in every judgment of probability, there is a presupposition, im- 
plicit or explicit, of one, or more, species of actual occasions implicated in 
the situation considered, so that, by (iii),t there is a presupposition of 
some general type of environment. 

Thus the basis of all probability and induction is the fact of analogy 
between an environment presupposed and an environment directly ex- 
perienced. 

The argument, as to the statistical basis of probability, then recurred to 
the doctrine of social order. According to this doctrine, all social order 
depends on the statistical dominance in the environment of occasions be- 
longing [315] to the requisite societies. The laws of nature are statistical 
laws derived from this fact. Thus the judgment of probability can be 
derived from an intuition— in general vague and imprecise— as to the sta- 
tistical basis of the presupposed environment. This judgment can be de- 
rived from the analogy with the experienced environment. There will be 
such factors in experience adequate to justify a judgment of the inductive 
type. 

But there is another factor from which, in combination with the four 
premises, a non-statistical judgment of probability can be derived. The 
principle of the graduated 'intensive relevance' of eternal objects to the 
primary physical data of experience expresses a real fact as to the pref- 
erential adaptation of selected eternal objects to novel occasions originat- 
ing from an assigned environment. 

This principle expresses the prehension by every creature of the grad- 
uated order of appetitions constituting the primordial nature of God. 
There can thus be an intuition of an intrinsic suitability of some definite 
outcome from a presupposed situation. There will be nothing statistical in 
this suitability. It depends upon the fundamental graduation of appeti- 
tions which lies at the base of things, and which solves all indeterminations 
of transition. 

In this way, there can be an intuition of probability respecting the origi- 
nation of some novelty. It is evident that the statistical theory entirely 
fails to provide any basis for such judgments. 

It must not be thought that these non-statistical judgments are in any 
sense religious. They lie at a far lower level of experience than do the 
religious emotions. The secularization of the concept of God's functions 
in the world is at least as urgent a requisite of thought as is the seculariza- 
tion of other elements in experience. The concept of God is certainly one 
essential element in religious feeling. But the converse is not true; the 
concept of religious feeling is not an essential element in the con- [316] cept 
of God's function in the universe. In this respect religious literature has 
been sadly misleading to philosophic theory, partly by attraction and partly 
by repulsion. 



CHAPTER X 
PROCESS 

SECTION I 

[317] That all things flow' is the first vague generalization which the 
unsystematized, barely analysed, intuition of men has produced. It is the 
theme of some of the best Hebrew poetry in the Psalms; it appears as one 
of the first generalizations of Greek philosophy in the form of the saying 
of Heraclitus; amid the later barbarism of Anglo-Saxon thought it reappears 
in the story of the sparrow flitting through the banqueting? hall of the 
Northumbrian king; and in all stages of civilization its recollection lends 
its pathos to poetry. Without doubt, if we are to go back to that ultimate, 
integral experience, unwarped by the sophistications of theory, that ex- 
perience whose elucidation is the final aim of philosophy, the flux of things 
is one ultimate generalization around which we must weave our philo- 
sophical system. 

At this point we have transformed the phrase, 'all things flow/ into the 
alternative phrase, 'the flux of things.' In so doing, the notion of the 'flux' 
has been held up before our thoughts as one primary notion for further 
analysis. But in the sentence 'all things flow,' there are three words— and 
we have started by isolating the last word of the three. We move back- 
ward to the next word 'things' and ask. What sort of things flow? Finally 
we reach the first word 'all' and ask, What is the meaning of the 'many' 
things engaged in this common flux, and in what sense, if any, can the 
word 'all' refer to a definitely indicated set of these many things? 

The elucidation of meaning involved in the phrase 'all things flow't is 
one chief task of metaphysics. 

[318] But there is a rival notion, antithetical to the former. I cannot 
at the moment recall one immortal phrase which expresses it with the 
same completeness as that with which! the alternative notion has been 
rendered by Heraclitus. This other notion dwells on permanences of 
things— the solid earth, the mountains, the stones, the Egyptian Pyramids, 
the spirit of man, God, 

The best rendering of integral experience, expressing its general form 
divested of irrelevant details, is often to be found in the utterances of 
religious aspiration. One of the reasons of the thinness of so much modern 
metaphysics is its neglect of this wealth of expression of ultimate feeling. 

208 



Process 209 

Accordingly we find in the first two lines of a famous hymn a full ex- 
pression of the union of the two notions in one integral experience: 

Abide with me; 

Fast falls the eventide. 

Here the first line expresses the permanences, 'abide/ 'me' and the 'Being' 
addressed; and the second line sets these permanences amid the inescapable 
flux. Here at length we find formulated the complete problem of meta- 
physics. Those philosophers who start with the first line have given us the 
metaphysics of 'substance 7 ; and those who start with the second line have 
developed the metaphysics of 'flux/ But, in truth, the two lines cannot be 
torn apart in this way; and we find that a wavering balance between the 
two is a characteristic of the greater number of philosophers. Plato found 
his permanences in a static, spiritual heaven, and his flux in the entangle- 
ment of his forms amid the fluent imperfections of the physical world. 
Here I draw attention to the word 'imperfection/ In any assertion as to 
Plato I speak under correction; but I believe that Plato's authority can be 
claimed for the doctrine that the things that flow are imperfect in the 
sense of 'limited' and of 'definitely exclusive of much that they might be 
and are not/ The lines quoted from the hymn are an almost perfect 
expres- [3 J 9] sion of the direct intuition from which the main position of 
the Platonic philosophy is derived. Aristotle corrected his Platonism into 
a somewhat different! balance. He was the apostle of 'substance and at- 
tribute/ and of the classifies tory logic which this notion suggests. But, on 
the other side, he makes a masterly analysis of the notion of 'generation/ 
Aristotle in his own person expressed a useful protest against the Platonic 
tendency to separate a static spiritual world from a fluent world of super- 
ficial experience. The later Platonic schools stressed this tendency: just as 
the mediaeval Aristotelian thought allowed the static notions of Aristotle's 
logic to formulate some of the main metaphysical problems in terms which 
have lasted till today. 

On the whole, the history of philosophy supports Bergson's charge that 
the human intellect 'spatializes the universe'; that is to say, that it tends 
to ignore the fluency, and to analyse the world in terms of static categories. 
Indeed Bergson went further and conceived this tendency as an inherent 
necessity of the intellect. I do not believe this accusation; but I do hold 
that 'spatialization' is the shortest route to a clear-cut philosophy expressed 
in reasonably familiar language. Descartes gave an almost perfect example 
of such a system of thought. The difficulties of Cartesianism with its 
three clear-cut substances, and with its 'duration' and 'measured time' 
well in the background, illustrate the result of the subordination of fluency. 
This subordination is to be found in the unanalysed longing of the hymn, 
in Plato's vision of heavenly perfection, in Aristotle's logical concepts, 
and in Descartes' mathematical mentality. Newton, that Napoleon of the 
world of thought, brusquely ordered fluency back into the world, regi- 



210 Discussions and Applications 

merited into his 'absolute mathematical time, flowing equably without 
regard to anything external/ He also gave it a mathematical uniform in 
the shape of his Theory of Fluxions. 

At this point the group of seventeenth- and eighteenth- [320] century 
philosophers practically made a discovery, which, although it lies on the 
surface of their writings, they only half-realized. The discovery is that 
there are two kinds of fluency. One kind is the concrescence\ which, in 
Locke's language, is 'the real internal constitution of a particular existent/ 
The other kind is the transition from particular existent to particular 
existent. This transition, again in Locke's language, is the 'perpetually 
perishing' which is one aspect of the notion of time; and in another aspect 
the transition is the origination of the present in conformity with the 
'power' of the past. 

The phrase 'the real internal constitution of a particular existent/ the 
description of the human understanding as a process of reflection upon 
data, the phrase 'perpetually perishing/ and the word 'power' together 
with its elucidation are all to be found in Locke's Essay. Yet owing to the 
limited scope of his investigation Locke did not generalize or put his 
scattered ideas together. This implicit notion of the two kinds of flux finds 
further unconscious illustration in Hume, It is all but explicit in Kant, 
though— as I think— misdescribed. Finally, it is lost in the evolutionary 
monism of Hegel and of his derivative schools. With all his inconsistencies, 
Locke is the philosopher to whom it is most useful to recur, when we de- 
sire to make explicit the discovery of the two kinds of fluency, required for 
the description of the fluent world. One kind is the fluency inherent in the 
constitution of the particular existent. This kind I have called 'concres- 
cence.' The other kind is the fluency whereby the perishing of the process, 
on the completion of the particular existent, constitutes that existent as 
an original element in the constitutions of other particular existents 
elicited by repetitions of process. This kind I have called 'transition/ Con- 
crescence moves towards its final cause, which is its subjective aim; transi- 
tion is the vehicle of the efficient cause, which is the immortal past. 

The discussion of how the actual particular occasions become original 
elements for a new creation is termed [32 1] the theory of objectifi cation. 
The objectified particular occasions together have the unity of a datum for 
the creative concrescence. But in acquiring this measure of connection, 
their inherent presuppositions of each other eliminate certain elements 
in their constitutions, and elicit into relevance other elements. Thus ob- 
jectification is an operation of mutually adjusted abstraction, or elimina- 
tion, whereby the many occasions of the actual world become one complex 
datum. This fact of the elimination by reason of synthesis is sometimes 
termed the perspective of the actual world from the standpoint of 
that concrescence. Each actual occasion defines its own actual world 
from which it originates. No two occasions can have identical actual 
worlds. 



Process 211 



SECTION II 

'Concrescence' is the name for the process in which the universe of 
many things acquires an individual unity in a determinate relegation of 
each item of the 'many' to its subordination in the constitution of the 
novel 'one/ 

The most general term 'thing'— or, equivalently, 'entity'— means nothing 
else than to be one of the 'many' which find their niches in each instance 
of concrescence. Each instance of concrescence is itself the novel indi- 
vidual 'thing' in question. There are not 'the concrescence' and 'the! novel 
thing': when we analyse the novel thing we find nothing but the concres- 
cence. 'Actuality' means nothing else than this ultimate entry into the 
concrete, in abstraction from which there is mere nonentity. In other 
words, abstraction from the notion of 'entry into the concrete' is a self- 
contradictory notion, since it asks us to conceive a thing as not a thing. 

An instance of concrescence is termed an 'actual entity'— or, equiva- 
lently, an 'actual occasion.' There is not one completed set of things which 
are actual occasions. For the fundamental inescapable fact is the creativity 
[322] in virtue of which there can be no 'many things' which are not sub- 
ordinated in a concrete unity. Thus a set of all actual occasions is by the 
nature of things a standpoint for another concrescence which elicits a con- 
crete unity from those many actual occasions. Thus we can never survey 
the actual world except from the standpoint of an immediate concrescence 
which is falsifying the presupposed completion. The creativity in virtue of 
which any relative** complete actual world is, by the nature of things, the 
datum for a new concrescencet is termed 'transition.' Thus, by reason of 
transition, 'the actual world' is always a relative term, and refers to that 
basis of presupposed actual occasions which is a datum for the novel 
concrescence. 

An actual occasion is analysable. The analysis discloses operations trans- 
forming entities which are individually alien t into components of a com- 
plex which is concretely one. The term 'feeling' will be used as the generic 
description of such operations. We thus say that an actual occasion is a 
concrescence effected by a process of feelings. 

A feeling can be considered in respect to (i) the actual occasions felt, 
(ii) the eternal objects felt, (hi) the feelings felt, and (iv) its own sub- 
jective forms of intensity. In the process of concrescence the diverse feel- 
ings pass on to wider generalities of integral feeling. 

Such a wider generality is a feeling of a complex of feelings, including 
their specific elements of identity and contrast. This process of the integra- 
tion of feeling proceeds until the concrete unity of feeling is obtained. In 
this concrete unity all indetermination as to the realization of possibilities 
has been eliminated. The many entities of the universe, including those 
originating in the concrescence itself, find their respective roles in this 



212 Discussions and Applications 

final unity. This final unity is termed the 'satisfaction.' The 'satisfaction' 
is the culmination of the concrescence into a completely determinate 
matter of fact. In any of its antecedent stages the concrescence exhibits 
sheer inde- [323] termination as to the nexus between its many components. 

SECTION III 

An actual occasion is nothing but the unity to be ascribed to a particular 
instance of concrescence. This concrescence is thus nothing else than the 
'real internal constitution' of the actual occasion in question. The analysis 
of the formal constitution of an actual entity has given three stages in the 
process of feeling: (i) the responsive phase, (ii) the supplemental stage, 
and (hi) the satisfaction. 

The satisfaction is merely the culmination marking the evaporation of 
all indetermination; so that, in respect to all modes of feeling and to all 
entities in the universe, the satisfied actual entity embodies a determinate 
attitude of 'yes' or 'no/ Thus the satisfaction is the attainment of the 
private ideal which is the final cause of the concrescence. But the process 
itself lies in the two former phases. The first phase is the phase of pure 
reception of the actual world in its guise of objective datum for aesthetic 
synthesis. In this phase there is the mere reception of the actual world as 
a multiplicity of private centres of feeling, implicated in a nexus of mutual 
presupposition. The feelings are felt as belonging to the external centres, 
and are not absorbed into the private immediacy. The second stage is 
governed by the private ideal, gradually shaped in the process itself; 
whereby the many feelings, derivatively felt as alien, are transformed into 
a unity of aesthetic appreciation immediately felt as private. This is the 
incoming of 'appetition/ which in its higher exemplifications we term 
'vision.' In the language of physical science, the 'scalar' form overwhelms 
the original 'vector' form: the origins become subordinate to the individual 
experience. The vector form is not lost, but is submerged as the founda- 
tion of the scalar superstructure. 

In this second stage the feelings assume an emotional [324] character 
by reason of this influx of conceptual feelings. But the reason why the 
origins are not lost in the private emotion is that there is no element in 
the universe capable of pure privacy. If we could obtain a complete analy- 
sis of meaning, the notion of pure privacy would be seen to be self- 
contradictory. Emotional feeling is still subject to the third metaphysical 
principle,** that to be 'something' is 'to have the potentiality for acquiring 
real unity with other entities.' Hence, 'to be a real component of an actual 
entity' is in some way 'to realize this potentiality.' Thus 'emotion' is 'emo- 
tional feeling ; and Vhat is felt' is the presupposed vector situation. In 
physical science this principle takes the form which should never be lost 
sight of in fundamental speculation, that scalar quantities are constructs 
derivative from vector quantities. In more familiar language, this prin- 



Process 213 

ciple can be expressed by the statement that the notion of 'passing on' is 
more fundamental than that of a private individual fact. In the abstract 
language here adopted for metaphysical statement, 'passing on 7 becomes 
'creativity/ in the dictionary sense of the verb create, 'to bring forth, beget, 
produce/ Thus, according to the third principle, no entity can be divorced 
from the notion of creativity. An entity is at least a particular form 
capable of infusing its own particularity into creativity. An actual entity, 
or a phase of an actual entity, is more than that; but, at least, it is that. 

Locke's 'particular ideas' are merely the antecedent actual entities exer- 
cising their function of infusing with their own particularity the 'passing 
on/t which is the primary phase of the 'real internal constitution' of the 
actual entity in question. In obedience to a prevalent misconception, 
'Locke termed this latter entity the 'mind'; and discussed its 'furniture/ 
when he should have discussed 'mental operations' in their capacity of 
later phases in the constitutions of actual entities. Locke himself flittingly 
expresses this fundamental vector function of his 'ideas/ In a paragraph, 
forming a portion of a quotation already [325] made, he writes: "I confess 
power includes in it some kind of relation,— a relation to action or change; 
as, indeed, which of our ideas, of what kind soever, when attentively con- 
sidered, does not?" x 

SECTION IV 

The second phase, that of supplementation, divides itself into two 
subordinate phases. Both of these phases may be trivial; also they are not 
truly separable, since they interfere with each other by intensification or 
inhibition. If both phases are trivial, the whole second phase is merely the 
definite negation of individual origination; and the process passes passively 
to its satisfaction. The actual entity is then the mere vehicle for the trans- 
ference of inherited constitutions of feeling. Its private immediacy passes 
out of the picture. Of these two sub-phases, the former— so far as there is 
an order— is that of aesthetic supplement, and the latter is that of intel- 
lectual supplement. 

In the aesthetic supplement there is an emotional appreciation of the 
contrasts and rhythms inherent in the unification of the objective content 
in the concrescence of one actual occasion. In this phase perception is 
heightened by its assumption of pain and pleasure, beauty and distaste. 
It is the phase of inhibitions and intensifications. It is the phase in which 
blue becomes more intense by reason of its contrasts, and shape acquires 
dominance by reason of its loveliness. What was received as alien, has 
been recreated as private. This is the phase of perceptivity, including 
emotional reactions to perceptivity. In this phase, private immediacy has 
welded the data into a new fact of blind feeling. Pure aesthetic supple- 

1 Essay, II, XXI, 3.t 



214 Discussions and Applications 

ment has solved its problem. This phase requires an influx of conceptual 
feelings and their integration with the pure physical feelings . 

But 'blindness' of the process, so far, retains an indetermination. There 
must be either a determinate nega- [326] tion of intellectual 'sight/ or an 
admittance of intellectual 'sight/ The negationt of intellectual sight is 
the dismissal into irrelevancet of eternal objects in their abstract status of 
pure potentials. 'What might be' has the capability of relevant contrast 
with 'what is/ If the pure potentials, in this abstract capacity, are dis- 
missed from relevance, the second sub-phase is trivial. The process then 
constitutes a blind actual occasion, 'blind' in the sense that no intellectual 
operations are involved; though conceptual operations are always involved. 
Thus there is always mentality in the form of 'vision/ but not always 
mentality in the form of conscious 'intellectuality/ 

But if some eternal objects, in their abstract capacity, are realized as 
relevant to actual fact, there is an actual occasion with intellectual opera- 
tions. The complex of such intellectual operations is sometimes termed the 
'mind' of the actual occasion; and the actual occasion is also termed 
'conscious/ But the term 'mind' conveys the suggestion of independent 
substance. This is not meant here: a better term is the 'consciousness' 
belonging to the actual occasion. 

An eternal object realized in respect to its pure potentiality as related 
to determinate logical subjects is termed a 'prepositional feeling' in the 
mentality of the actual occasion in question. The consciousness belonging 
to an actual occasion is its sub-phase of intellectual supplementation, when 
that sub-phase is not purely trivial. This sub-phase is the eliciting, into 
feeling, oft the full contrast between mere propositional potentiality and 
realized fact. 

SECTION V 

To sum up: There are two species of process, macroscopic! process, and 
microscopic process. The macroscopic process is the transition from at- 
tained actuality to actuality in attainment; while the microscopic process 
is the conversion of conditions which are merely real into determinate 
actuality. The former process effects the [327] transition from the 'actual' 
to the 'merely real'; and the latter process effects the growth from the real 
to the actual. The former process is efficient; the latter process ist teleo- 
logical. The future is merely real, without being actual; whereas the past 
is a nexus of actualities. The actualities are constituted by their real genetic 
phases. The present is the immediacy of teleological process whereby 
reality becomes actual. The former process provides the conditions which 
really govern attainment; whereas the latter process provides the ends 
actually attained. The notion of 'organism' is combined with that of 
'process' in a twofold manner. The community of actual things is an 
organism; but it is not a static organism. It is an incompletion in process 



Process 215 

of production. Thus the expansion of the universe in respect to actual 
things is the first meaning of 'process'; and the universe in any stage of 
its expansion is the first meaning of 'organism/ In this sense, an organism 
is a nexus. 

Secondly, each actual entity is itself only describable as an organic pro- 
cess. It repeats in microcosm what the universe is in macrocosm. It is a 
process proceeding from phase to phase, each phase being the real basis 
from which its successor proceeds towards the completion of the thing 
in question. Each actual entity bears in its constitution the 'reasons' why 
its conditions are what they are. These 'reasons' are the other actual en- 
tities objectified for it. 

An 'object' is a transcendent element characterizing that definiteness 
to which our 'experience' has to conform. In this sense, the future has 
objective reality in the present, but no formal actuality. For it is inherent 
in the constitution of the immediate, present actuality that a future will 
supersede it. Also conditions to which that future must conform, includ- 
ing real relationships to the present, are really objective in the immediate 
actuality. 

Thus each actual entity, although complete so far as concerns its micro- 
scopic process, is yet incomplete by reason of its objective inclusion of 
the macroscopicf [328] process. It really experiences a future which must 
be actual, although the completed actualities of that future are undeter- 
mined. In this sense, each actual occasion experiences its own objective 
immortality. 

Note. — The function here ascribed to an 'object' is in general agreement with 
a paragraph (p. 249, 2nd! edition) in Professor Kemp Smith's Commentary on 
Kant's Critique, where he is considering Kant's 'Objective Deduction' as in the 
first edition of the Critique: "When we examine the objective, we find that the 
primary characteristic distinguishing it from the subjective is that it lays a com- 
pulsion upon our minds, constraining us to think about it in a certain way. By 
an object is meant something which will not allow us to think at haphazard." 

There is of course the vital difference, among others, that where Kemp Smith, 
expounding Kant, writes 'thinking/ the philosophy of organism substitutes 
'experiencing.' 



