PART III 
THE THEORY OF PREHENSIONS 



CHAPTER I 
THE THEORY OF FEELINGS 

SECTION I 

[334] The philosophy of organism is a cell-theory of actuality. Each ul- 
timate unit of fact is a cell-complex, not analysable into components with 
equivalent completeness of actuality. 

The cell can be considered genetically and morphologically. The ge- 
netic theoryt is considered in this part; [335] the morphological theory is 
considered in Part IV, under the title of the 'extensive analysis' of an 
actual entity. 

In the genetic theory, the cell is exhibited as appropriating for the 
foundation of its own existence, the various elements of the universe out 
of which it arises. Each process of appropriation of a particular element 
is termed a prehension. The ultimate elements of the universe, thus ap- 
propriated, are the already constituted! actual entities, and the eternal 
objects. All the actual entities are positively prehended, but only a selec- 
tion of the eternal objects. In the course of the integrations of these 
various prehensions, entities of other categoreal types become relevant; 
and some new entities of these types, such as novel propositions and 
generic contrasts, come into existence. These relevant entities of these 
other types are also prehended into the constitution of the concrescent 
cell. This genetic process has now to be traced in its main outlines. 

An actual entity is a process in the course of which many operations 
with incomplete subjective unity terminate in a completed unity of opera- 
tion, termed the 'satisfaction/ The 'satisfaction' is the contentment of 
the creative urge by the fulfilment of its categoreal demands. The analysis 
of these categories is one aim of metaphysics. 

The process itself is the constitution of the actual entity; in Locke's 
phrase, it is the 'real internal constitution' of the actual entity. In the 
older phraseology employed by Descartes, the process is what the actual 
entity is in itself, Jormaliter. 7 The terms 'formal' and 'formally' are here 
used in this sense. 

The terminal unity of operation, here called the 'satisfaction/ embodies 
what the actual entity is beyond itself. In Locke's phraseology, the 'powers' 
of the actual entity are discovered in the analysis of the satisfaction. In 
Descartes' phraseology, the satisfaction is the actual entity considered as 
analysable in respect to its existence [336] 'objective,'* It is the actual 
entity as a definite, determinate, settled fact, stubborn and with unavoid- 

219 



220 The Theory of Prehensions 

able consequences. The actual entity as described by the morphology of 
its satisfaction is the actual entity 'spatialized/ to use Bergson's term. The 
actual entity, thus spatialized, is at given individual fact actuated by its 
own 'substantial form/ Its own process, which is its own internal existence, 
has evaporated, worn out and satisfied; but its effects are all to be described 
in terms of its "satisfaction/ The 'effects' of an actual entity are its in- 
terventions in concrescent processes other than its own. Any entity, thus 
intervening in processes transcending itself, is said to be functioning as an 
'object/ According to the fourth Category of Explanation it is the one 
general metaphysical character of all entities of all sorts, that they function 
as objects. It is this metaphysical character which constitutes the solidarity 
of the universe. The peculiarity of an actual entity is that it can be con- 
sidered both 'objectively' and 'formally/ The 'objective' aspect is mor- 
phological so far as that actual entity is concerned: by this it is meant 
that the process involved is transcendent relatively to it, so that the esse 
of its satisfaction is sentiri. The 'formal' aspect is functional so far as that 
actual entity is concerned: by this it is meant that the process involved is 
immanent in it. But the objective consideration is pragmatic. It is the 
consideration of the actual entity in respect to its consequences. In the 
present chapter the emphasis is laid upon the formal consideration of an 
actual entity. But this formal consideration of one actual entity requires 
reference to the objective intervention of other actual entities. This ob- 
jective intervention of other entities constitutes the creative character 
which conditions the concrescence in question. The satisfaction of each 
actual entity is an element in the givenness of the universe: it limits bound- 
less, abstract possibility into the particular real potentiality from which 
each novel concrescence originates. The 'boundless, abstract possibility' 
means the creativity [337] considered solely in reference to the possibilities 
of the intervention of eternal objects, and in abstraction from the ob- 
jective intervention of actual entities belonging to any definite actual 
world, including God among the actualities abstracted from. 

SECTION II 

The possibility of finite truths depends on the fact that the satisfaction 
of an actual entity is divisible into a variety of determinate operations. 
The operations are 'prehensions/ But the negative prehensions which con- 
sist of exclusions from contribution to the concrescence can be treated 
in their subordination to the positive prehensions. These positive prehen- 
sions are termed 'feelings/ The process of concrescence is divisible into 
an initial stage of many feelings, and a succession of subsequent phases 
of more complex feelings integrating the earlier simpler feelings, up to 
the satisfaction which is one complex unity of feeling. This is the genetic' 
analysis of the satisfaction. Its 'coordinate' analysis will be given later, 
in Part IV. 



The Theory of Feelings 221 

Thus a component feeling in the satisfaction is to be assigned, for its 
origination, to an earlier phase of the concrescence. 

This is the general description of the divisible character of the satis- 
faction, from the genetic standpoint. The extensiveness which underlies 
the spatio-temporal relations of the universe is another outcome of this 
divisible character. Also the abstraction from its own full formal consti- 
tution involved in objectifications of one actual entity in the constitu- 
tions of other actual entities equally depends upon this same divisible 
character, whereby the actual entity is conveyed in the particularity of 
some one of its feelings. A feeling— i.e., a positive prehension — is essen- 
tially a transition effecting a concrescence. Its complex constitution is 
analysable into five factors which express what that transition consists of, 
and effects. The factors are: (i) the 'subject' which feels, (ii) the 'initial 
[338] data' which are to be felt, (iii) the 'elimination' in virtue of nega- 
tive prehensions, (iv) the 'objective datum 7 which is felt, (v) the 'sub- 
jective form* which is how that subject feels that objective datum. 

A feeling is in all respects determinate, with a determinate subject, 
determinate initial data, determinate negative prehensions, a determinate 
objective datum, and a determinate subjective form. There is a transition 
from the initial data to the objective datum effected by the elimination. 
The initial data constitute a 'multiplicity/ or merely one 'proper' entity, 
while the objective datum is a 'nexus/ a proposition, or a 'proper' entity 
of some categoreal type. There is a concrescence of the initial data into the 
objective datum, made possible by the elimination, and effected by the 
subjective form. The objective datum is the perspective of the initial data.i 
The subjective form receives its determination from the negative prehen- 
sions, the objective datum, and the conceptual origination of the subject. 
The negative prehensions are determined by the categoreal conditions 
governing feelings, by the subjective form, and by the initial data. This 
mutual determination of the elements involved in a feeling is one expres- 
sion of the truth that the subject of the feeling is causa sui. The partial 
nature of a feeling, other than the complete satisfaction, is manifest by the 
impossibility of understanding its generation without recourse to the whole 
subject. There is a mutual sensitivity of feelings in one subject, governed by 
categoreal conditions. This mutual sensitivity expresses the notion of final 
causation in the guise of a pre-established harmony. 

SECTION III 

A feeling cannot be abstracted from the actual entity entertaining it. 
This actual entity is termed the 'subject' of the feeling. It is in virtue of 
its subject that the feeling is one thing. If we abstract the subject from 
the feeling we are left with many things. Thus a feeling is [339] a particu- 
lar in the same sense in which each actual entity is a particular. It is one 
aspect of its own subject. 



222 The Theory of Prehensions 

The term 'subject' has been retained because in this sense it is familiar 
in philosophy. But it is misleading. The term 'superject* would be better. 
The subject-superject is the purpose of the process originating the feelings. 
The feelings are inseparable from the end at which they aim; and this end 
is the feeler. The feelings aim at the feeler, as their final cause. The feelings 
are what they are in order that their subject may be what it is. Then 
transcendently, since the subject is what it is in virtue of its feelings, it is 
only by means of its feelings that the subject objectively conditions the 
creativity transcendent beyond itself. In our own relatively high grade 
of human existence, this doctrine of feelings and their subject is best il- 
lustrated by our notion of moral responsibility. The subject is responsible 
for being what it is in virtue of its feelings. It is also derivatively respon- 
sible for the consequences of its existence because they flow from its 
feelings. 

If the subject-predicate form of statement be taken to be metaphysically 
ultimate, it is then impossible to express this doctrine of feelings and their 
superject. It is better to say that the feelings aim at their subject, than 
to say that they are aimed at their subject. For the latter mode of expres- 
sion removes the subject from the scope of the feeling and assigns it to 
an external agency. Thus the feeling would be wrongly abstracted from its 
own final cause. This final cause is an inherent element in the feeling, 
constituting the unity of that feeling. An actual entity feels as it does 
feel in order to be the actual entity which it is. In this way an actual en- 
tity satisfies Spinoza's notion of substance: it is causa sui. The creativity 
is not an external agency with its own ulterior purposes. All actual entities 
share with God this characteristic of self-causation. For this reason every 
actual entity also shares with God the characteristic of transcending all 
other actual entities, including God. The [340] universe is thus a creative 
advance into novelty. The alternative to this doctrine is a static morpho- 
logical universe. 

SECTION IV 

There are three main categoreal conditions which flow from the final 
nature of things. These three conditions are: (i) the Category of Subjective 
Unity, (ii) the Category of Objective Identity, and (iii) the Category of 
Objective Diversity. Later we shall isolate five** other categoreal conditions. 
But the three conditions mentioned above have an air of ultimate meta- 
physical generality. 

The first category has to do with self-realization. Self-realization is the 
ultimate fact of facts. An actuality is self-realizing, and whatever is self- 
realizing is an actuality. An actual entity is at once the subject of self- 
realization, and the superject which is self-realized. 

The second and third categories have to do with objective determina- 
tion. All entities, including even other actual entities, enter into the self- 
realization of an actuality in the capacity of determinants of the definite- 



The Theory of Feelings 223 

ness of that actuality. By reason of this objective functioning of entities 
there is truth and falsehood. For every actuality is devoid of a shadow of 
ambiguity: it is exactly what it is, by reason of its objective definition at 
the hands of other entities. In abstraction from actualization, truth and 
falsehood are meaningless: we are in the region of nonsense, a limbo where 
nothing has any claim to existence. But definition is the soul of actuality: 
the attainment of a peculiar definiteness is the final cause which animates 
a particular process; and its attainment halts its process, so that by tran- 
scendence it passes into its objective immortality as a new objective con- 
dition added to the riches of definiteness attainable, the 'real potentiality' 
of the universe. 

A distinction must here be made. Each task of creation is a social effort, 
employing the whole universe. Each novel actuality is a new partner add- 
ing a new con- [341] dition. Every new condition can be absorbed into ad- 
ditional fullness of attainment. On the other hand, each condition is ex- 
clusive, intolerant of diversities; except so far as it finds itself in a web 
of conditions which convert its exclusions into contrasts. A new actuality 
may appear in the wrong society, amid which its claims to efficacy act 
mainly as inhibitions. Then a weary task is set for creative function, by an 
epoch of new creations to remove the inhibition. Insistence on birth at 
the wrong season is the trick of evil. In other words, the novel fact may 
throw back, inhibit, and delay. But the advance, when it does arrive, will 
be richer in content, more fully conditioned, and more stable. For in its 
objective efficacy an actual entity can only inhibit by reason of its alterna- 
tive positive contribution. 

A chain of facts is like a barrier reef. On one side there is wreckage, 
and beyond it harbourage and safety. The categories governing the deter- 
mination of things are the reasons why there should be evil; and are also 
the reasons why, in the advance of the world, particular evil facts are finally 
transcended. 

SECTION V 

Category I. The many feelings which belong to an incomplete phase in 
the process of an actual entity, though unintegrated by reason of the in- 
completeness of the phase, are compatible for synthesis by reason of the 
unity of their subject. 

This is the Category of 'Subjective Unity/ This category is one expression 
of the general principle that the one subject is the final end which condi- 
tions each component feeling. Thus the superject is already present as a 
condition, determining how each feeling conducts its own process. Al- 
though in any incomplete phase there are many unsynthesized feelings, 
yet each of these feelings is conditioned by the other feelings. The process 
of each feeling is such as to render that feeling integrable with the other 
feelings. 

[342] This Category of Subjective Unity is the reason why no feeling can 



224 The Theory of Prehensions 

be abstracted from its subject. For the subject is at work in the feeling, in 
order that it may be the subject with that feeling. The feeling is an epi- 
sode in self-production, and is referent to its aim. This aim is a certain 
definite unity with its companion feelings. 

This doctrine of the inherence of the subject in the process of its pro- 
duction requires that in the primary phase of the subjective process there 
be a conceptual feeling of subjective aim: the physical and other feelings 
originate as steps towards realizing this conceptual aim through their 
treatment of initial data. This basic conceptual feeling suffers simplifica- 
tion in the successive phases of the concrescence. It starts with conditioned 
alternatives, and by successive decisions is reduced to coherence. The doc- 
trine of responsibility is entirely concerned with this modification. In each 
phase the corresponding conceptual feeling is the 'subjective end* charac- 
teristic of that phase. The many feelings, in any incomplete phase, are 
necessarily compatible with each other by reason of their individual con- 
formity to the subjective end evolved for that phase. 

This Category of Subjective Unity is a doctrine of pre-established har- 
mony, applied to the many feelings in an incomplete phase. If we recur 
therefore to the seven kinds of 'proper' entities, and ask how to classify 
an incomplete phase, we find that it has the unity of a proposition. In ab- 
straction from the creative urge by which each such phase is merely an 
incident in a process, this phase is merely a proposition about its com- 
ponent feelings and their ultimate superject. The pre-established harmony 
is the self-consistency of this proposition, that is to say, its capacity for 
realization. But such abstraction from the process does violence to its 
nature; for the phase is an incident in the process. When we try to do 
justice to this aspect of the phase, we must say that it is a proposition 
seeking truth. It is a lure to the supervention of those integrating feel- 
ings by which the mere [343] potentiality of the proposition, with its out- 
standing indeterminations as to its setting amid the details of the universe, 
is converted intof the fully determinate actuality. 

The ground, or origin, of the concrescent process! is the multiplicity 
of data in the universe, actual entities and eternal objects and propositions 
and nexus. Each new phase in the concrescence means the retreat of mere 
propositional unity before the growing grasp of real unity of feeling. Each 
successive propositional phase is a lure to the creation of feelings which 
promote its realization. Each temporal entity, in one sense, originates from 
its mental pole, analogously to God himself. It derives from God its basic 
conceptual aim, relevant to its actual world, yet with indeterminations 
awaiting its own decisions. This subjective aim, in its successive modifi- 
cations, remains the unifying factor governing the successive phases of 
interplay between physical and conceptual feelings. These decisions are 
impossible for the nascent creature antecedently to the novelties in the 
phases of its concrescence. But this statement in its turn requires amplifi- 



The Theory of Feelings 225 

cation. With this amplification the doctrine, that the primary phase of a 
temporal actual entity is physical, is recovered. A 'physical feeling' is here 
defined to be the feeling of another actuality. If the other actuality be 
objectified by its conceptual feelings, the physical feeling of the subject 
in question is termed 'hybrid/ Thus the primary phase is a hybrid physical 
feeling of God, in respect to God's conceptual feeling which is immedi- 
ately relevant to the universe 'given' for that concrescence. There is then, 
according to the Category of Conceptual Valuation, i.e., Categoreal Obliga- 
tion IV, a derived conceptual feeling which reproduces for the subject the 
data and valuation of God's conceptual feeling. This conceptual feeling 
is the initial conceptual aim referred to in the preceding statement. In this 
sense, God can be termed the creator of each temporal actual entity. But 
the phrase is apt to be misleading by [344] its suggestion that the ultimate 
creativity of the universe is to be ascribed to God's volition. The true 
metaphysical position is that God is the aboriginal instance of this creativ- 
ity, and is therefore the aboriginal condition which qualifies its action. It 
is the function of actuality to characterize the creativity, and God is the 
eternal primordial character. But,t of course, there is no meaning to 
'creativity' apart from its 'creatures,' and no meaning to 'God' apart from 
the 'creativity' and the 'temporal creatures,' and no meaning to the 'tem- 
poral creatures' t apart from 'creativity' and 'God.' 

Category II. There can be no duplication of any element in the ob- 
jective datum of the satisfaction of an actual entity, so far as concerns the 
function of that element in that satisfaction. 

This is the 'Category of Objective Identity.' This category asserts the es- 
sential self-identity of any entity as regards its status in each individuali- 
zation of the universe. In such a concrescence one thing has one rdle, 
and cannot assume any duplicity. This is the very meaning of self-identity, 
that, in any actual confrontation of thing with thing, one thing cannot 
confront itself in alien rdles. Any one thing remains obstinately itself 
playing a part with self-consistent unity. This category is one ground of 
incompatibility. 

Category III. There can be no 'coalescence' of diverse elements in the 
objective datum of an actual entity, so far as concerns the functions of 
those elements in that satisfaction. 

This is the 'Category of Objective Diversity.' Here* the term 'coalescence' 
means the self-contradictory notion of diverse elements exercising an ab- 
solute identity of function, devoid of the contrasts inherent in their di- 
versities. In other words, in a real complex unity each particular component 
imposes its own particularity on its status. No entity can have an abstract 
status in a real unity. Its status must be such that only it can fill and only 
that actuality can supply. 

[345] The neglect of this category is a prevalent error in metaphysical 
reasoning. This category is another ground of incompatibility. 



226 The Theory of Prehensions 



SECTION VI 

The importance of these categories can only be understood by consider- 
ing each actual world in the light of a 'medium' leading up to the con- 
crescence of the actual entity in question. It will be remembered that the 
phrase actual world' has always reference to some one concrescence. 

Any actual entity, which we will name A, feels other actual entities, f 
which we will name B, C, and D. Thus B, C, and D all lie in the actual 
world of A. But C and D may lie in the actual world of B, and are then 
felt by it; also D may lie in the actual world of C and be felt by it. This 
example might be simplified, or might be changed to one of any degree of 
complication. Now B, as an initial datum for A's feeling, also presents C 
and D for A to feel through its mediation. Also C, as an initial datum for 
A ? s feeling, also presents D for A to feel through its mediation. Thus, in 
this artificially simplified example, A has D presented for feeling through 
three distinct sources: (i) directly as a crude datum, (ii) by the mediation 
of B, and (iii) by the mediation of C. This threefold presentation is D, in 
its function of an initial datum for A's feeling of it, so far as concerns the 
mediation of B and C. But, of course, the artificial simplification of the 
medium to two intermediaries is very far from any real case. The medium 
between D and A consists of all those actual entities which lie in the 
actual world of A and not in the actual world of D. For the sake of sim- 
plicity the explanation will continue in terms of this threefold presen- 
tation. 

There are thus three sources of feeling, D direct, D in its nexus with 
C, and D in its nexus with B. Thus in the basic phase of A's concresence 
there arise three prehensions of the datum D. According to the first cate- 
gory [346] these prehensions are not independent. This subjective unity 
of the concrescence introduces negative prehensions, so that D in the di- 
rect feeling is not felt in its formal completeness, but objectified with the 
elimination of such of its prehensions as are inconsistent with D felt 
through the mediation of B, and through the mediation of C. Thus the 
three component feelings of the first phasef are consistent, so as to pass 
into the integration of the second phase in which there is A's one feeling 
of a coherent objectification of D. Since D is necessarily self-consistent, 
the inconsistencies must arise from the subjective forms of the prehen- 
sions of D by B directly, by C directly, and by A directly. These incon- 
sistencies lead to the eliminations in A's total prehension of D. 

In this process, the negative prehensions which effect the elimination are 
not merely negligible. The process through which a feeling passes in con- 
stituting itself! also records itself in the subjective form of the integral 
feeling. The negative prehensions have their own subjective forms which 
they contribute to the process. A feeling bears on itself the scars of its 
birth; it recollects as a subjective emotion its struggle for existence; it re- 



The Theory of Feelings 227 

tains the impress of what it might have been, but is not. It is for this 
reason that what an actual entity has avoided as a datum for feeling may 
yet be an important part of its equipment. The actual cannot be reduced 
to mere matter of fact in divorce from the potential. 

The same principle of explanation also holds in the case of a con- 
ceptual prehension, in which the datum is an eternal object. In the first 
phase of this conceptual prehension, there is this eternal object to be 
felt as a mere abstract capacity for giving definiteness to a physical feeling. 
But also there are the feelings of the objectifications of innumerable actual 
entities. Some of these physical feelings illustrate this same eternal object 
as an element providing their definiteness. There are in this way diverse 
prehensions of the same eternal object; and by the first category these 
various prehensions must be [347] consistent, so as to pass into the inte- 
gration of the subsequent phase in which there is one coherent complex 
feeling, namely, a conceptual feeling of that eternal object. This sub- 
jective insistence on consistency may, from the beginning, replace the 
positive feelings by negative prehensions. 

SECTION VII 

In the explanations of the preceding section, only the first category 
has been explicitly alluded to. It must now be pointed out how the other 
categories have been tacitly presupposed. 

The fact that there is integration at all arises from the condition ex- 
pressed by the Category of Objective Identity. The same entity, be it actual 
entity or be it eternal object, cannot be felt twice in the formal constitu- 
tion of one concrescence. The incomplete phases with their many feelings 
of one object are only to be interpreted in terms of the final satisfaction 
with its one feeling of that one object Thus objective identity requires 
integration of the many feelings of one object into the one feeling of 
that object. The analysis of an actual entity is only intellectual, or, to speak 
with a wider scope, only objective. Each actual entity is a cell with atomic 
unity. But in analysis it can only be understood as a process; it can only 
be felt as a process, that is to say, as in passage. The actual entity is divis- 
ible; but is in fact undivided. The divisibility can thus only refer to its 
objectifications in which it transcends itself. But such transcendence is 
self-revelation. 

[348] +The third category is concerned with the antithesis to oneness, 
namely, diversity. An actual entity is not merely one; it is also definitely 
complex. But, to be definitely complex is to include definite diverse ele- 
ments in definite ways. The category of objective deversity expresses the 
inexorable condition— that a complex unity must provide for each of its 
components a real diversity of status, with a reality which bears the same 
sense as its own reality and is peculiar to itself. In other words, a real unity 
cannot provide sham diversities of status for its diverse components. 



228 The Theory of Prehensions 

This category is in truth only a particular application of the second 
category. For a 'status' is after all something; and, according to the Cate- 
gory of Objective Identity, it cannot duplicate its r61e. Thus if the 'status 7 
be the status of this, it cannot in the same sense be the status of that. The 
prohibition of sham diversities of status sweeps away the 'class-theory' t of 
particular substances, which was waveringly suggested by Locke (II, 
XXIII, 1), was more emphatically endorsed by Hume (Treatise, Bk. I,t 
Part I, Sect. 6), and has been adopted by Hume's followers. For the es- 
sence of a class is that it assigns no diversity of function to the members 
of its extension. The members of a class are diverse members in virtue 
of mere logical disjunction. The 'class/ thus appealed to, is a mere mul- 
tiplicity. But in the prevalent discussion of classes, there are illegitimate 
transitions to the notions of a 'nexus' and of a 'proposition.' The appeal to 
a class to perform the services of a proper entity is exactly analogous to 
an appeal to an imaginary terrier to kill a real rat. 

+Thus the process of integration, which lies at the very heart of the 
concrescence, is the urge imposed on the concrescent unity of that uni- 
verse by the three Categories of Subjective Unity, of Objective Identity, and 
of Objective Diversity. The oneness of the universe, and the oneness of 
each element in the universe, repeat themselves to the crack of doom in 
the creative advance from creature to creature, each creature including in 
itself the whole of history and exemplifying the self-identity of things and 
their mutual diversities. 

SECTION VIII 

This diversity of status, combined with the real unity of the components, 
means that the real synthesis of two component elements in the objective 
datum of a feeling [349] must be infected with the individual particulari- 
ties of each of the relata. Thus the synthesis in its completeness expresses 
the joint particularities of that pair of relata, and can relate no others. A 
complex entity with this individual definiteness, arising out of determinate- 
ness of eternal objects, will be termed a 'contrast/ A contrast cannot be 
abstracted from the contrasted relata. 

The most obvious examples of a contrast are to be found by confining 
attention purely to eternal objects. The contrast between blue and red 
cannot be repeated as that contrast between any other pair of colours, 
or any pair of sounds, or between a colour and a sound. It is just the con- 
trast between blue and red, that and nothing else. Certain abstractions from 
that contrast, certain values inherent in it, can also be got from other 
contrasts. But they are other contrasts, and not that contrast; and the 
abstractions are not 'contrasts' of the same categoreal type. 

In another sense, a 'nexus' falls under the meaning of the term 'con- 
trast'; though we shall avoid this application of the term. What are or- 
dinarily termed 'relations' are abstractions from contrasts. A relation can 



The Theory of Feelings 229 

be found in many contrasts; and when it is so found, it is said to relate 
the things contrasted. The term 'multiple contrast 7 will be used when 
there are or may be more than two elements jointly contrasted, and it is 
desired to draw attention to that fact. A multiple contrast is analysable 
into component dual contrasts. But a multiple contrast is not a mere ag- 
gregation of dual contrasts. It is one contrast, over and above its com- 
ponent contrasts. This doctrine that a multiple contrast cannot be con- 
ceived as a mere disjunction of dual contrasts is the basis of the doctrine 
of emergent evolution. It is the doctrine of real unities being more than 
a mere collective disjunction of component elements. This doctrine has 
the same ground as the objection to the class-theory of particular sub- 
stances. The doctrine is a commonplace of art. 

Bradley's discussions of relations are confused by his [350] failure to 
distinguish between relations and contrasts. A relation is a genus of con- 
trasts. He is then distressed— or would have been distressed if he had not 
been consoled by the notion of 'mereness' as in 'mere appearance'— to 
find that a relation will not do the work of a contrast. It fails to contrast. 
Thus Bradley's argument proves that relations, among other things, are 
'mere'; that is to say, are indiscretions of the absolute, apings of reality 
without self-consistency. 

SECTION IX 

One use of the term 'contrast' is to mean that particularity of conjoint 
unity which arises from the realized togetherness of eternal objects. But 
there is another, and more usual, sense of 'particularity/ This is the sense 
in which the term 'particular' is applied to an actual entity. 

One actual entity has a status among other actual entities, not expres- 
sible wholly in terms of contrasts between eternal objects. For example, 
the complex nexus of ancient imperial Rome to European history is not 
wholly expressible in universals. It is not merely the contrast of a sort of 
city, imperial, Roman, ancient, with a sort of history of a sort of con- 
tinent, sea-indented, river-diversified, with alpine divisions, begirt by larger 
continental masses and oceanic wastes, civilized, barbarized, christianized, 
commercialized, industrialized. The nexus in question does involve such 
a complex contrast of universals. But it involves more. For it is the nexus 
of that Rome with that Europe. We cannot be conscious of this nexus 
purely by the aid of conceptual feelings. This nexus is implicit, below con- 
sciousness, in our physical feelings. In part we are conscious of such 
physical feelings, and of that particularity of the nexus between particular 
actual entities. This consciousness takes the form of our consciousness of 
particular spatial and temporal relations between things directly perceived. 
But, as in the case of Rome and Europe, so far as con- \3S1] cerns the mass 
of our far-reaching knowledge, the particular nexus between the partic- 
ular actualities in question ist only indicated by constructive reference 
to the physical feelings of which we are conscious. 



230 The Theory of Prehensions 

This peculiar particularity of the nexus between actual entities can be 
put in another way. Owing to the disastrous confusion, more especially 
by Hume, of conceptual feelings with perceptual feelings, the truism 
that we can only conceive in terms of universals has been stretched to 
mean that we can only feel in terms of universals. This is untrue. Our 
perceptual feelings feel particular existents; that is to say, a physical 
feeling, belonging to the percipient, feels the nexus between two other 
actualities, A and B. It feels feelings of A which feel B, and feels feelings 
of B which feel A. It integrates these feelings, so as to unify their identity 
of elements. These identical elements form the factor defining the nexus 
between A and B, a nexus also retaining the particular diversity of A and 
B in its uniting force. 

Also the more complex multiple nexus between many actual entities in 
the actual world of a percipient is felt by that percipient. But this nexus, 
as thus felt, can be abstracted from that particular percipient. It is the 
same nexus for all percipients which include those actual entities in their 
actual worlds. The multiple nexus is how those actual entities are really 
together in all subsequent unifications of the universe, by reason of the 
objective immortality of their real mutual prehensions of each other. 

We thus arrive at the notion of the actual world of any actual entity, 
as a nexus whose objectification constitutes the complete unity of ob- 
jective datum for the physical feeling of that actual entity. This actual 
entity is the original percipient of that nexus. But any other actual entity 
which includes in its own actual world that original percipientf also in- 
cludes that previous nexus as a portion of its own actual world. Thus each 
actual world is a nexus which in this sense is independent of its original 
[352] percipient. It enjoys an objective immortality in the future beyond 
itself. 

Every nexus is a component nexus, first accomplished in some later phase 
of concrescence of an actual entity, and ever afterwards having its status 
in actual worlds as an unalterable fact, dated and located among the 
actual entities connected in itself. If in a nexus there be a realized con- 
trast of universals, this contrast is located in that actual entity to which 
it belongs as first originated in one of its integrative feelings. Thus every 
realized contrast has a location, which is particular with the particularity 
of actual entities. It is a particular complex matter of fact, realized; and, 
because of its reality, a standing condition in every subsequent actual 
world from which creative advance must originate. 

It is this complete individual particularity of each actuality, and of each 
nexus, and of each realized contrast, which is the reason for the three 
Categoreal Conditions—of Subjective Unity, of Objective Identity, and of 
Objective Diversity. The word 'event* is used sometimes in the sense of a 
nexus of actual entities, and sometimes in the sense of a nexus as objecti- 
fied by universals. In either sense, it is a definite fact with a date. 

The initial data of a complex feeling, as mere data, are many; though 



The Theory of Feelings 231 

as felt they are one in the objective unity of a pattern. Thus a nexus is a 
realized pattern of the initial data: though this pattern is merely relative to 
the feeling, expressive of those factors in the many data by reason of which 
they can acquire their unity in the feeling. This is the second use of the 
term nexus, mentioned above. 

Thus, just as the 'feeling as one' cannot bear the abstraction from it of 
the subject, so the 'data as one' cannot bear the abstraction from it of 
every feeling which feels it as such. According to the ontological principle, 
the impartial nexus is an objective datum in the consequent nature of God; 
since it is somewhere and yet not by any necessity of its own nature im- 
plicated in the [353] feelings of any determined actual entity of the actual 
world. The nexus involves realization somewhere. This is the first use of 
the term nexus. 

In two extreme cases the initial data of a feeling have a unity of their 
own. In one case, the data reduce to a single actual entity, other than the 
subject of the feeling; and in the other case the data reduce to a single 
eternal object. These are called 'primary feelings/ A particular feeling 
divorced from its subject is nonsense. 

There are thus two laws respecting the feelings constituting the com- 
plex satisfaction of an actual entity: (i) An entity can only be felt once, 
and (ii) the diverse feelings, in the same subject, of the same entity as 
datum which are to be unified into one feeling, must be compatible in their 
treatment of the entity felt. In conformity with this pre-established har- 
mony, 'incompatibility' would have dictated from the beginning that some 
'feeling' be replaced by a negative prehension. 

SECTION X 

The subjective forms of feelings are best discussed in connection with 
the different types of feelings which can arise. This classification into types 
has regard to the differences among feelings in respect to their initial data, 
their objective data, and their subjective forms. But these sources of dif- 
ference cannot wholly be kept separate. 

A feeling is the appropriation of some elements in the universe to be 
components in the real internal constitution of its subject. The elements 
are the initial data; they are what the feeling feels. But they are felt under 
an abstraction. The process of the feeling involves negative prehensions 
which effect elimination. Thus the initial data are felt under a 'perspective' 
which is the objective datum of the feeling. 

In virtue of this elimination the components of the complex objective 
datum have become 'objects' intervening in the constitution t of the sub- 
ject of the feeling. In the phraseology of mathematical physics a feeling 
has a [354] 'vector' character. A feeling is the agency by which other things 
are built into the constitution of its one subject in process of concrescence. 
Feelings are constitutive of the nexus by reason of which the universe finds 
its unification ever renewed by novel concrescence. The universe is always 



232 The Theory of Prehensions 

one, since there is no surveying it except from an actual entity which uni- 
fies it. Also the universe is always new, since the immediate actual entity is 
the superject of feelings which are essentially novelties. 

The essential novelty of a feeling attaches to its subjective form. The 
initial data, and even the nexus which is the objective datum, may have 
served other feelings with other subjects. But the subjective form is the 
immediate novelty; it is how that subject is feeling that objective datum. 
There is no tearing this subjective form from the novelty of this con- 
crescence. It is enveloped in the immediacy of its immediate present. The 
fundamental example of the notion 'quality inhering inf particular sub- 
stance' is afforded by 'subjective form inhering in feeling/ If we abstract 
the form from the feeling, we are left with an eternal object as the rem- 
nant of subjective form. 

A feeling can be genetically described in terms of its process of origina- 
tion, with its negative prehensions whereby its many initial data become 
its complex objective datum. In this process the subjective form originates, 
and carries into the feeling its own history transformed into the way in 
which the feeling feels. The way in which the feeling feels expresses how 
the feeling came into being. It expresses the purpose which urged it for- 
ward, and the obstacles which it encountered, and the indeterminations 
which were dissolved by the originative decisions of the subject. 

There are an indefinite number of types of feeling according to the 
complexity of the initial data which the feeling integrates, and according 
to the complexity of the objective datum which it finally feels. But there 
are three primary types of feeling which enter into the forma- [355] tion of 
all the more complex feelings. These types are: (i) that of simple physical 
feelings, (ii) that of conceptual feelings, and (iii) that of transmuted 
feelings. In a simple physical feeling, the initial datum is a single actual 
entity; in a conceptual feeling, the objective datum is an eternal object;! 
in a transmuted feeling, the objective datum is a nexus of actual entities. 
Simple physical feelings and transmuted feelings make up the class of 
physical feelings. 

In none of these feelings, taken in their original purity devoid of ac- 
cretions from later integrations, does the subjective form involve conscious- 
ness. Although in a propositional feeling the subjective form may involve 
judgment, this element in the subjective form is not necessarily present. 

One final remark must be added to the general description of a feeling. 
A feeling is a component in the concrescence of a novel actual entity. The 
feeling is always novel in reference to its data; since its subjective form, 
though it must always have reproductive reference to the data, is not 
wholly determined by them. The process of the concrescence is a progres- 
sive integration of feelings controlled by their subjective forms. In this 
synthesis, feelings of an earlier phase sink into the components of some 
more complex feeling of a later phase. Thus each phase adds its element 
of novelty, until the final phase in which the one complex 'satisfaction' is 



The Theory of Feelings 233 

reached. Thus the actual entity, as viewed morphologically through its 
'satisfaction/ is novel in reference to any one of its component feelings. It 
presupposes those feelings. But conversely, no feeling can be abstracted 
either from its data, or its subject. It is essentially a feeling aiming at that 
subject, and motivated by that aim. Thus the subjective form embodies 
the pragmatic aspect of the feeling; for the datum is felt with that subjec- 
tive form in order that the subject may be the superject which it is. 

In the analysis of a feeling, whatever presents itself as also ante rem is a 
datum, whatever presents itself as \}S6] exclusively in re is subjective form, 
whatever presents itself in re and post rem is 'subject-superject/ This doc- 
trine of 'feeling' is the central doctrine respecting the becoming of an 
actual entity. In a feeling the actual world, selectively appropriated, is the 
presupposed datum, not formless but with its own realized form selectively 
germane, in other words 'objectified/ The subjective form is the ingression 
of novel form peculiar to the new particular fact, and with its peculiar 
mode of fusion with the objective datum. The subjective form in abstrac- 
tion from the feeling is merely a complex eternal object. In the becoming, 
it meets the 'data' which are selected from the actual world. In other 
words, the data are already 'in being/ There the term 'in being' is for the 
moment used as equivalent to the term 'in realization/ 

SECTION XI 

**A subjective form has two factors, its qualitative pattern and its pattern 
of intensive quantity. But these two factors of pattern cannot wholly be 
considered in abstraction from each other. For the relative intensities of 
the qualitative elements in the qualitative pattern are among the relational 
factors which constitute that qualitative pattern. Also conversely, there are 
qualitative relations among the qualitative elements and they constitute an 
abstract qualitative pattern for the qualitative relations. The pattern of 
intensities is not only the variety of qualitative elements with such-and- 
such intensities; but it is also the variety of qualitative elements, as in 
such-and-such an abstract qualitative pattern, with such-and-such inten- 
sities. Thus the two patterns are not really separable. It is true that there 
is an abstract qualitative pattern, and an abstract intensive pattern; but in 
the fused pattern the abstract qualitative pattern lends itself t to the in- 
tensities, and the abstract intensive pattern lends itself to the qualities. 

Further, the subjective form cannot be absolutely dis- [357] joined from 
the pattern of the objective datum. Some elements of the subjective form 
can be thus disjoined; and they form the subjective form as in abstraction 
from the patterns of the objective datum. But the full subjective form can- 
not be abstracted from the pattern of the objective datum. The intel- 
lectual disjunction is not a real separation. Also the subjective form, amid 
its own original elements, always involves reproduction of the pattern of 
the objective datum. 

As a simple example of this description of a feeling, consider the audi- 



234 The Theory of Prehensions 

tion of sound. In order to avoid unnecessary complexity, let the sound be 
one definite note. The audition of this note is a feeling. This feeling has 
first an auditor, who is the subject of the feeling. But the auditor would not 
be the auditor that he is apart from this feeling of his. 

Secondly, there is the complex ordered environment composed of certain 
other actual entities which, however vaguely, is felt by reason of this audi- 
tion. This environment is the datum of this feeling. It is the external 
world, as grasped systematically in this feeling. In this audition it is felt 
under the objectification of vague spatial relations, and as exhibiting musi- 
cal qualities. But the analytic discrimination of this datum of the feeling 
is in part vague and conjectural, so far as consciousness is concerned: there 
is the antecedent physiological functioning of the human body, and the 
presentational immediacy of the presented locus. 

There is also an emotional sensory pattern, the subjective form, which is 
more definite and more easily analysable. The note, in its capacity of a 
private sensation, has pitch, quality, and intensity. It is analysable into its 
fundamental tone, and a selection of its overtones. This analysis reveals an 
abstract qualitative pattern which is the complex relatedness of the funda- 
mental tone-quality* with the tone-qualities of its select overtones. This 
qualitative pattern may, or may not, include relations of a spatial type, if 
some of the overtones come [358] from instruments spatially separate— f for 
example, from a spatial pattern of tuning forks. 

The fundamental tone, and its overtones, have, each of them, their own 
intensities. This pattern of intensities can be analysed into the relative 
intensities of the various tones and the absolute intensity which is the 
total loudness. The scale of relative intensities enters into the final quality 
of the note, with some independence of its absolute loudness. 

Also the spatial pattern of the tuning forks and the resonance of the mu- 
sic chamber enter into this quality. But these also concern the datum of the 
feeling. Also in this integration of feeling we must include the qualitative 
and quantitative auditory contributions derived from various nerve-routes of 
the body. In this way the animal body, as part of the external world, takes 
a particularly prominent place in the pattern of the datum of the feeling. 
Also in the subjective form we must reckon qualities of joy and distaste, of 
adversion and of aversion, which attach integrally to the audition, and also 
differentially to various elements of the audition. In an earlier phase of the 
auditor, there is audition divested of such joy and distaste. This earlier, 
bare audition does not in its own nature determine this additional qualifi- 
cation. It originates as the audition becomes an element in a higher syn- 
thesis, and yet it is an element in the final component feeling. Thus the 
audition gains complexity of subjective form by its integration with other 
feelings. Also, though we can discern three patterns, namely, the pattern of 
the datum, the pattern of emotional quality, and the pattern of emotional 
intensity, we cannot analyse either of the latter patterns in complete 
separation either from the pattern of the datum, or from each other. 



The Theory of Feelings 235 

The final concrete component in the satisfaction is the audition with its 
subject, its datum, and its emotional pattern as finally completed. It is a 
particular fact not to be torn away from any of its elements. 

SECTION XII 

[359] Prehensions are not atomic; they can be divided into other pre- 
hensions and combined into other prehensions. Also prehensions are not 
independent of each other. The relation between their subjective forms is 
constituted by the one subjective aim which guides their formation. This 
correlation of subjective forms is termed 'the mutual sensitivity' of prehen- 
sions (cf. Part I, Ch. II, Sect. HI, Categoreal Obligation VII, The Cate- 
gory of Subjective Harmony 7 ). 

The prehensions in disjunction are abstractions; each of them is its sub- 
ject viewed in that abstract objectification. The actuality is the totality of 
prehensions with subjective unity in process of concrescence into concrete 
unity. 

There are an indefinite number of prehensions, overlapping, subdividing, 
and supplementary to each other. The principle, according to which a pre- 
hension can be discovered, is to take any component in the objective 
datum of the satisfaction; in the complex pattern of the subjective form 
of the satisfaction there will be a component with direct relevance to this 
element in the datum. Then in the satisfaction, there is a prehension of 
this component of the objective datum with that component of the total 
subjective form as its subjective form. 

The genetic growth of this prehension can then be traced by considering 
the transmission of the various elements of the datum from the actual 
world, and— in the case of eternal objects— their origination in the con- 
ceptual prehensions. There is then a growth of prehensions, with integra- 
tions, eliminations, and determination of subjective forms. But the deter- 
mination f of successive phases of subjective forms, whereby the integra- 
tions have the characters that they do have, depends on the unity of the 
subject imposing a mutual sensitivity upon the prehensions. Thus a pre- 
hension, considered genetically, can never free itself from the incurable 
atomicity [360] of the actual entity to which it belongs. The selection of a 
subordinate prehension from the satisfaction— as described above— involves 
a hypothetical, propositional point of view. The fact is the satisfaction as 
one. There is some arbitrariness in taking a component from the datum 
with a component from the subjective form, and in considering them, on 
the ground of congruity, as forming a subordinate prehension. The justifi- 
cation is that the genetic process can be thereby analysed. If no such 
analysis of the growth of that subordinate prehension can be given, then 
there has been a faulty analysis of the satisfaction. This relation between 
the satisfaction and the genetic process is expressed in the eighth and ninth 
categories of explanation (cf. Part I, Ch. II, Sect. II). 



CHAPTER II 
THE PRIMARY FEELINGS 

SECTION I 

[361] A 'simple physical feeling' entertained in one subject is a feeling 
for which the initial datum is another single actual entity, and the ob- 
jective datum is another feeling entertained by the latter actual entity. 

Thus in a simple physical feeling there are two actual entities con- 
cerned. One of them is the subject of that feeling, and the other is the 
initial datum of the feeling. A second feeling is also concerned, namely, 
the objective datum of the simple physical feeling. This second feeling is 
the 'objectification' of its subject for the subject of the simple physical 
feeling. The initial datum is objectified as being the subject of the feeling 
which is the objective datum: the objectification is the 'perspective' of the 
initial datum. 

A simple physical feeling is an act of causation. The actual entity which 
is the initial datum is the 'cause/ the simple physical feeling is the 'effect/ 
and the subject entertaining the simple physical feeling is the actual entity 
'conditioned' by the effect. This 'conditioned' actual entity will also be 
called the 'effect.' All complex causal action can be reduced to a complex 
of such primary components. Therefore simple physical feelings will also 
be called 'causal' feelings. 

But it is equally true to say that a simple physical feeling is the most 
primitive type of an act of perception, devoid of consciousness. The actual 
entity which is the initial datum is the actual entity perceived, the ob- 
jective datum is the 'perspective' under which that actual entity is per- 
ceived, and the subject of the simple physical feeling [362] is the perceiver. 
This is not an example of conscious perception. For the subjective form 
of a simple physical feeling does not involve consciousness, unless acquired 
in subsequent phases of integration. It seems as though in practice, for 
human beings at least, only transmuted feelings acquire consciousness, 
never simple physical feelings. Consciousness originates in the higher 
phases of integration and illuminates those phases with the greater clarity 
and distinctness. 

Thus a simple physical feeling is one feeling which feels another feeling. 
But the feeling felt has a subject diverse from the subject of the feeling 
which feels it. A multiplicity of simple physical feelings entering into the 
propositional unity of a phase constitutes the first phase in the concres- 
cence of the actual entity which is the common subject of all these feel- 



The Primary Feelings 237 

ings. The limitation, whereby the actual entities felt are severally reduced 
to the perspective of one of their own feelings, is imposed by the Gate- 
goreal Condition of Subjective Unity, requiring a harmonious compatibility 
in the feelings of each incomplete phase. Thus the negative prehensions, 
involved in the production of any one feeling, are not independent of the 
other feelings. The subjective forms of feelings depend in part on the 
negative prehensions. This primary phase of simple physical feelings con- 
stitutes the machinery by reason of which the creativity transcends the 
world already actual, and yet remains conditioned by that actual world in 
its new impersonation. 

Owing to the vagueness of our conscious analysis of complex feelings, 
perhaps we never consciously discriminate one simple physical feeling in 
isolation. But all our physical relationships arc made up of such simple 
physical feelings, as their atomic bricks. Apart from inhibitions or additions, 
weakenings or intensifications, due to the history of its production, the 
subjective form of a physical feeling is re-enaction of the subjective form 
of the feeling felt. Thus the cause passes on its feeling to be reproduced 
by the new subject as its own, and yet [363] as inseparable from the cause. 
There is a flow of feeling. But the re-enaction is not perfect. The cate- 
goreal demands of the concrescence require adjustments of the pattern of 
emotional intensities. The cause is objectively in the constitution of the 
effect, in virtue of being the feeler of the feeling reproduced in the effect 
with partial equivalence of subjective form. Also the cause's feeling has its 
own objective datum, and its own initial datum. Thus this antecedent 
initial datum has now entered into the datum of the effect's feeling at 
second-hand through the mediation of the cause. 

The reason why the cause is objectively in the effectt is that the cause's 
feeling cannot, as a feeling, be abstracted from its subject which is the 
cause. This passage of the cause into the effect is the cumulative character 
of time. The irreversibility of time depends on this character. 

Note that in the 'satisfaction' there is an integration of simple physical 
feelings. No simple physical feeling need be distinguished in consciousness. 
Physical feelings may be merged with feelings of any type, and of whatever 
complexity. A simple physical feeling has the dual character of being the 
cause's feeling re-enacted for the effect as subject. But this transference of 
feeling effects a partial identification of cause with effect, and not a mere 
representation of the cause. It is the cumulation of the universe and not a 
stage-play about it. In a simple feeling there is a double particularity in 
reference to the actual world, the particular cause and the particular ef- 
fect. In Locke's language (III, III, 6), and with his limitation of thought, 
a simple feeling is an idea in one mind 'determined to this or that particu- 
lar existent.' Locke is here expressing what only metaphysicians can doubt. 

By reason of this duplicity in a simple feeling there is a vector character 
which transfers the cause into the effect. It is a feeling from the cause 
which acquires the subjectivity of the new effect without loss of its original 



238 The Theory of Prehensions 

[364] subjectivity in the cause. Simple physical feelings embody the re- 
productive character of nature, and also the objective immortality of the 
past. In virtue of these feelings time is the conformation of the immediate 
present to the past. Such feelings are 'conformar feelings. 

The novel actual entity, which is the effect, is the reproduction of the 
many actual entities of the past. But in this reproduction there is abstrac- 
tion from their various totalities of feeling. This abstraction is required by 
the categoreal conditions for compatible synthesis in the novel unity. This 
abstractive 'objectification' is rendered possible by reason of the 'divisible' 
character of the satisfactions of actual entities. By reason of this 'divisible' 
character causation is the transfer of a feeling, and not of a total satisfac- 
tion. The other feelings are dismissed by negative prehensions, owing to 
their lack of compliance with categoreal demands. 

A simple physical feeling enjoys a characteristic which has been variously 
described as 're-enaction/ 'reproduction/ and 'conformation/ This charac- 
teristic can be more accurately explained in terms of the eternal objects 
involved. There are eternal objects determinant of the definiteness of the 
objective datum which is the 'cause/ and eternal objects determinant of 
the definiteness of the subjective form belonging to the 'effect/ When 
there is re-enaction there is one eternal object with two-way functioning, 
namely, as partial determinant of the objective datum, and as partial de- 
terminant of the subjective form. In this two-way role, the eternal object 
is functioning relationally between the initial data on the one hand and 
the concrescent subject on the other. It is playing one self-consistent role in 
obedience to the Category of Objective Identity. 

Physical science is the science investigating spatio-temporal and quan- 
titative characteristics of simple physical feelings. The actual entities of the 
actual world are bound together in a nexus of these feelings. Also in the 
creative advance, the nexus proper to an antecedent [365] actual world is 
not destroyed. It is reproduced and added to, by the new bonds of feeling 
with the novel actualities which transcend it and include it. But these 
bonds have always their vector character. Accordingly the ultimate physical 
entities for physical science are always vectors indicating transference. In 
the world there is nothing static. But there is reproduction; and hence the 
permanence which is the result of order, and the cause of it. And yet there 
is always change; for time is cumulative as well as reproductive, and the 
cumulation of the many is not their reproduction as many. 

This section on simple physical feelings lays the foundation of the treat- 
ment of cosmology in the philosophy of organism. It contains the discus- 
sion of the ultimate elements from which a more complete philosophical 
discussion of the physical world— that is to say, of nature— must be derived. 
In the first place an endeavour has been made to do justice alike to the 
aspect of the world emphasized by Descartes and to the atomism of the 
modern quantum theory. Descartes saw the natural world as an extensive 
spatial plenum, enduring through time. Modern physicists see energy 



The Primary Feelings 239 

transferred in definite quanta. This quantum theory also has analogues in 
recent neurology. Again fatigue is the expression of cumulation- it is phys- 
ical memory. Further,! causation and physical memory spring from the 
same root: both of them are physical perception. Cosmology must do 
equal justice to atomism, to continuity, to causation, to memory, to percep- 
tion, to qualitative and quantitative forms of energy, and to extension. 
But so far there has been no reference to the ultimate vibratory characters 
of organisms and to the 'potential' element in nature. 

SECTION II 

Conceptual feelings and simple causal feelings constitute the two main 
species of 'primary' feelings. All other feelings of whatever complexity 
arise out of a process of integration which starts with a phase of these 
[366] primary feelings. There is, however, a difference between the species. 
An actual entity in the actual world of a subject must enter into the con- 
crescence of that subject by some simple causal feeling, however vague, 
trivial, and submerged. Negative prehensions may eliminate its distinctive 
importance. But in some way, by some trace of causal feeling, the remote 
actual entity is prehended positively. In the case of an eternal object, 
there is no such necessity. In any given concrescence, it may be included 
positively by means of a conceptual feeling; but it may be excluded by a 
negative prehension. The actualities have to be felt, while the pure po- 
tentials can be dismissed. So far as concerns their functionings as objects, 
this is the great distinction between an actual entity and an eternal object. 
The one is stubborn matter of fact; and the other never loses its 'accent 7 of 
potentiality. 

In each concrescence there is a twofold aspect of the creative urge. In 
one aspect there is the origination of simple causal feelings; and in the 
other aspect there is the origination of conceptual feelings. These con- 
trasted aspects will be called the physical and the mental poles of an ac- 
tual entity. No actual entity is devoid of either pole; though their relative 
importance differs in different actual entities. Also conceptual feelings do 
not necessarily involve consciousness; though there can be no conscious 
feelings which do not involve conceptual feelings as elements in the 
synthesis. 

Thus an actual entity is essentially dipolar, with its physical and mental 
poles; and even the physical world cannot be properly understood without 
reference to its other side, which is the complex of mental operations. The 
primary mental operations are conceptual feelings. 

A conceptual feeling is feeling an eternal object in the primary meta- 
physical character of being an 'object/ that is to say, feeling its capacity 
for being a realized determinant of process. Immanence and transcendence 
are the characteristics of an object: as a realized determinant it [367] is 
immanent; as a capacity for determination it is transcendent; in both roles 



240 The Theory of Prehensions 

it is relevant to something not itself. There is no character belonging to 
the actual apart from its exclusive determination by selected eternal ob- 
jects. The definiteness of the actual arises from the exclusiveness of eternal 
objects in their function as determinants. If the actual entity be this, then 
by the nature of the case it is not that or that. The fact of incompatible 
alternatives is the ultimate fact in virtue of which there is definite charac- 
ter. A conceptual feeling is the feeling of an eternal object in respect to its 
general capacity as a determinant of character, including thereby its ca- 
pacity of exclusiveness. In the technical phraseology of these lectures, a 
conceptual feeling is a feeling whose 'datum' is an eternal object. Anal- 
ogously a negative prehension is termed 'conceptual'! when its datum is 
an eternal object. In a conceptual feeling there is no necessary progress 
from the 'initial data' to the 'objective datum/ The two may be identical, 
except in so far as conceptual feelings with diverse sources of origination 
acquire integration. 

Conceptual prehensions, positive or negative, constitute the primary 
operations among those belonging to the mental pole of an, actual entity. 

SECTION III 

The subjective form of a conceptual feeling has the character of a Val- 
uation/ and this notion must now be explained. 

A conceptual feeling arises in some incomplete phase of its subject and 
passes into a supervening phase in which it has found integration with 
other feelings. In this supervening phase, the eternal object, which is the 
datum of the conceptual feeling, is an ingredient in some sort of datum in 
which the other components are the objective data of other feelings in the 
earlier phase. This new datum is the integrated datum; it will be some sort 
of 'contrast/ By the first categoreal condition the feelings [368] of the 
earlier phase are compatible for integration. Thus the supervention of the 
later phase does not involve elimination by negative prehensions; such 
eliminations of positive prehensions in the concrescent subject would 
divide that subject into many subjects, and would divide these many sub- 
jects from the superject. But, though there can be no elimination from the 
supervening phase as a whole, there may be elimination from some new 
integral feeling which is merely one component of that phase. 

But in the formation of this integrated datum there must be determina- 
tion of exactly how this eternal object has ingress into that datum con- 
jointly with the remaining eternal objects and actual entities derived from 
the other feelings. This determination is effected by the subjective forms 
of the component conceptual feelings. Again it is to be remembered that, 
by the first categoreal condition, this subjective form is not independent of 
the other feelings in the earlier phase, and thus is such as to effect this 
determination. Also the integral feeling has its subjective form with its 
pattern of intensiveness. This patterned intensiveness regulates the dis- 



The Primary Feelings 241 

tinctive lelative importance of each element of the datum as felt in that 
feeling. This intensive regulation of that eternal object f as felt in the in- 
tegrated datum, is determined by the subjective form of the conceptual 
feeling. Yet again, by reference to the first, and seventh, categoreal condi- 
tions, this intensive form of the conceptual feeling has dependence also in 
this respect on the other feelings of the earlier phase. Thus, according as 
the valuation of the conceptual feeling is a Valuation up' or a Valuation 
down/ the importance of the eternal object as felt in the integrated feel- 
ing is enhanced, or attenuated. Thus the valuation is both qualitative, de- 
termining how the eternal object is to be utilized, and is also intensive, 
determining what importance that utilization is to assume. 

Thus a valuation has three characteristics: 

(i) According to the Categories of Subjective Unity, and [369] of Sub- 
jective Harmony, the valuation is dependent on the other feelings in its 
phase of origination. 

(ii) The valuation determines in what status the eternal object has in- 
gression into the integrated nexus physically felt. 

(iii) The valuation values up, or down, so as to determine the intensive 
importance accorded to the eternal object by the subjective form of the 
integral feeling. 

These three characteristics of an integral feeling, derived from its con- 
ceptual components, are summed up in the term 'valuation/ 

But though these three characteristics are included in a valuation, they 
are merely the outcome of the subjective aim of the subject, determining 
what it is itself integrally to be, in its own character of the superject of its 
own process. 

SECTION IV 

Consciousness concerns the subjective form of a feeling. But such a sub- 
jective form requires a certain type of objective datum. A subjective form 
in abstraction loses its reality, and sinks into an eternal object capable of 
determining a feeling into that distinctive type of definiteness. But when 
the eternal object 'informs' a feeling it can only so operate in virtue of its 
conformation to the other components which jointly constitute the defi- 
niteness of the feeling. The moral of this slight discussion must now be 
applied to the notion of 'consciousness/ Consciousness is an element in 
feeling which belongs to its subjective form. But there can only be that 
sort of subjective form when the objective datum has an adequate charac- 
ter. Further, the objective datum can only assume this character when it is 
derivate from initial data which carry in their individual selves the re- 
ciprocal possibilities of this objective synthesis. 

A pure conceptual feeling in its first mode of origination never involves 
consciousness. In this respect a pure mental feeling, conceptual or proposi- 
tional, is analogous [370] to a pure physical feeling. A primary feeling of 



242 The Theory of Prehensions 

either type, or a propositional feeling, can enrich its subjective form with 
consciousness only hy means of its alliances. 

Whenever there is consciousness there is some element of recollection. 
It recalls earlier phases from the dim recesses of the unconscious. Long ago 
this truth was asserted in Plato's doctrine of reminiscence. No doubt Plato 
was directly thinking of glimpses of eternal truths lingering in a soul 
derivate from a timeless heaven of pure form. Be that as it may, then in a 
wider sense consciousness enlightens experience which precedes it, and 
could be without it if considered as a mere datum. 

Hume, with opposite limitations to his meaning, asserts the same doc- 
trine. He maintains that we can never conceptually entertain what we have 
never antecedently experienced through impressions of sensation. The 
philosophy of organism generalizes the notion of 'impressions of sensation' 
into that of 'pure physical feeling/ Even then Hume's assertion is too un- 
guarded according to Hume's own showing. But the immediate point is 
the deep-seated alliance of consciousness with recollection both for Plato 
and for Hume. 

Here we maintain the doctrine that, in the analysis of the origination of 
any conscious feeling, some component physical feelings are to be found; 
and conversely, whenever there is consciousness, there is some component 
of conceptual functioning. For the abstract element in the concrete fact is 
exactly what provokes our consciousness. The consciousness is what arises 
in some process of synthesis of physical and mental operations. In hist 
doctrine of ideas, Locke goes further than Hume and is, as I think, more 
accurate in expressing the facts; though Hume adds something which 
Locke omits. 

Locke upholds the direct conscious apprehension of 'things without' 
(e.g.,t Essay, II, XXI, 1), otherwise termed 'exterior things' (II, XXIII, 1), 
or 'this or that particular existence' (III, III, 6), and illustrated by an in- 
dividual nurse and an individual mother (III, III, 7). [371] In the philos- 
ophy of organism the nexus, which is the basis for such direct apprehen- 
sion, is provided by the physical feelings. The philosophy of organism 
here takes the opposite road to that taken alike by Descartes and by Kant. 
Both of these philosophers accepted (Descartes with hesitations, and Kant 
without question) the traditional subjectivist sensationalism, and assigned 
the intuition of 'things without' peculiarly to the intelligence. 

Hume's addition consists in expressing and discussing, with the utmost 
clarity, the traditional sensationalist dogma. Thus for Hume, as for Locke 
when he remembers to speak in terms of this doctrine, an 'impression' is 
the conscious apprehension of a universal. For example, he writes {Trea- 
tise, Bk. I,t Part I, Ch. I), "That idea of red, which we form in the dark, 
and that impression which strikes our eyes in sunshine, differ only in de- 
gree, not in nature." t This means that a consistent sensationalism cannot 
distinguish between a percept and a concept. Hume had not in his mind 
(at least when philosophizing, though he admits it for other sorts of 'prac- 



The Primary Feelings 243 

tice') the fourth category of explanation, that no entity can be abstracted 
from its capacity to function as an object in the process of the actual world. 
To function as an object' is 'to be a determinant of the definiteness of an 
actual occurrence/ According to the philosophy of organism, a pure con- 
cept does not involve consciousness, at least in our human experience. 
Consciousness arises when a synthetic feeling integrates physical and con- 
ceptual feelings. Traditional philosophy in its account of conscious per- 
ception has exclusively fixed attention on its pure conceptual side; and 
thereby has made difficulties for itself in the theory of knowledge. Locke, 
with his naive good sense, assumes that perception involves more than this 
conceptual side; though he fails to grasp the inconsistency of this assump- 
tion with the extreme subjectivist sensational doctrine. Physical feelings 
form the non-conceptual element in our awareness of [372] nature. 1 Also, 
all awareness, even awareness of concepts, requires at least the synthesis of 
physical feelings with conceptual feeling. In awareness actuality, as a 
process in fact, is integrated with the potentialities which illustrate either 
what it is and might not be, or what it is not and might be. In other 
words, there is no consciousness without reference to definiteness, affirma- 
tion, and negation. Also affirmation involves its contrast with negation, 
and negation involves its contrast with affirmation. Further, affirmation 
and negation are alike meaningless apart from reference to the definiteness 
of particular actualities. Consciousness is how we feel the affirmation- 
negation contrast. Conceptual feeling is the feeling of an unqualified nega- 
tion; that is to say, it is the feeling of a definite eternal object with the 
definite extrusion of any particular realization. Consciousness requires that 
the objective datum should involve (as one side of a contrast) a qualified 
negative determined to some definite situation. It will be found later (cf. 
Ch. IV) that this doctrine implies that there is no consciousness apart 
from propositions as one element in the objective datum. 

1 Cf. The Concept of Nature, Ch. I. 



CHAPTER III 
THE TRANSMISSION OF FEELINGS 

SECTION I 

[373] According to the ontological principle there is nothing which 
floats into the world from nowhere. Everything in the actual world is re- 
ferable to some actual entity. It is either transmitted from an actual entity 
in the past, or belongs to the subjective aim of the actual entity to whose 
concrescence it belongs. This subjective aim is both an example and a limi- 
tation of the ontological principle. It is an example, in that the principle is 
here applied to the immediacy of concrescent fact. The subject completes 
itself during the process of concrescence by a self-criticism of its own 
incomplete phases. In another sense the subjective aim limits the on- 
tological principle by its own autonomy. But the initial stage of its aim is 
an endowment which the subject inherits from the inevitable ordering of 
things, conceptually realized in the nature of God. The immediacy of the 
concrescent subject is constituted by its living aim at its own self-constitu- 
tion. Thus the initial stage of the aim is rooted in the nature of God, and 
its completion depends on the self-causation of the subject-superject. This 
function of God is analogous to the remorseless working of things in 
Greek and in Buddhist thought. The initial aim is the best for that im- 
passe. But if the best be bad, then the ruthlessness of God can be personi- 
fied as Ate, the goddess of mischief. The chaff is burnt. What is inexorable 
in God, is valuation as an aim towards 'order'; and 'order' means 'society 
permissive of actualities with patterned intensity of feeling arising from 
adjusted con- [374] trasts/t In this sense God is the principle of concretion; 
namely, he is that actual entity from which each temporal concrescence 
receives that initial aim from which its self-causation starts. That aim 
determines the initial gradations of relevance of eternal objects for con- 
ceptual feeling; and constitutes the autonomous subject in its primary 
phase of feelings with its initial conceptual valuations, and with its initial 
physical purposes. Thus the transition of the creativity from an actual 
world to the correlate novel concrescence is conditioned by the relevance 
of God's all-embracing conceptual valuations to the particular possibilities 
of transmission from the actual world, and by its relevance to the various 
possibilities of initial subjective form available for the initial feelings. In 
this way there is constituted the concrescent subject in its primary phase 
with its dipolar constitution, physical and mental, indissoluble. 

244 



The Transmission of Feelings 245 

If we prefer the phraseology, we can say that God and the actual world 
jointly constitute the character of the creativity for the initial phase of the 
novel concrescence. The subject, thus constituted, is the autonomous mas- 
ter of its own concrescence into subject-superject. It passes from a sub- 
jective aim in concrescence into a superject with objective immortality. At 
any stage it is subject-superject. According to this explanation, self-deter- 
mination is always imaginative in its origin. The deterministic efficient 
causation is the inflow of the actual world in its own proper character of 
its own feelings, with their own intensive strength, felt and re-enacted by 
the novel concrescent subject. But this re-enaction has a mere character of 
conformation to pattern. The subjective valuation is the work of novel 
conceptual feeling; and in proportion to its importance, acquired in com- 
plex processes of integration and reintegration, this autonomous concep- 
tual element modifies the subjective forms throughout the whole range of 
feeling in that concrescence and thereby guides the integrations. 

In so far as there is negligible autonomous energy, the [375] subject 
merely receives the physical feelings, confirms their valuations according to 
the 'order' of that epoch, and transmits by reason of its own objective im- 
mortality. Its own flash of autonomous individual experience is negligible 
for the science which is tracing transmissions up to the conscious ex- 
perience of a final observer. But as soon as individual experience is not 
negligible, the autonomy of the subject in the modification of its initial 
subjective aim must be taken into account. Each creative act is the uni- 
verse incarnating itself as one, and there is nothing above it by way of final 
condition. 



SECTION II 

The general doctrine of the previous section requires an examination of 
principles regulating the transmission of feelings into data for novel feel- 
ings in a new concrescence. Since no feeling can be abstracted from its sub- 
ject, this transmission is merely another way of considering the objectifica- 
tion of actual entities. A feeling will be called 'physical' when its datum 
involves objectifications of other actual entities. In the previous chapter 
the special case of 'simple physical feelings' was discussed. A feeling be- 
longing to this special case has as its datum only one actual entity, and 
this actual entity is objectified by one of its feelings. All the more com- 
plex kinds of physical feelings arise in subsequent phases of concrescence, 
in virtue of integrations of simple t physical feelings with each other and 
with conceptual feelings. But before proceeding to these more complex 
physical feelings, a subdivision of simple physical feelings must be con- 
sidered. Such feelings are subdivided into 'pure physical feelings' and 'hy- 
brid physical feelings/ In a 'pure physical feeling' the actual entity which 
is the datum is objectified by one of its own physical feelings. Thus having 
regard to the 're-enaction' which is characteristic of the subjective form of 



246 The Theory of Prehensions 

a simple physical feeling, we have— in the case of the simpler actual en- 
tities—an example of the transference of energy in the physical [376] 
world. When the datum is an actual entity of a highly complex grade, the 
physical feeling by which it is objectified as a datum may be of a highly 
complex character, and the simple notion of a transference of some form 
of energy to the new subject may entirely fail to exhaust the important 
aspects of the pure physical feeling in question. 

In a 'hybrid physical feeling' the actual entity forming the datum is 
objectified by one of its own conceptual feelings. Thus having regard to 
the element of autonomy which is characteristic of the subjective form of 
a conceptual feeling, we have— in the case of the more complex actual 
entities— an example of the origination and direction of energy in the 
physical world. In general, this simplified aspect of a hybrid physical feel- 
ing does not exhaust its role in the concrescence of its subject. 

The disastrous separation of body and mind, characteristic of philo- 
sophical systems which are in any important respect derived from Car- 
tesianism, is avoided in the philosophy of organism by the doctrines of 
hybrid physical feelings and of the transmuted feelings. In these ways 
conceptual feelings pass into the category of physical feelings. Also con- 
versely, physical feelings give rise to conceptual feelings, and conceptual 
feelings give rise to other conceptual feelings— according to the doctrines 
of the Categories of Conceptual Valuation (Category IV), and of Con- 
ceptual Reversion (Category V), to be discussed in the subsequent sec- 
tions of this chapter. 

One important characteristic of a hybrid feeling is the intensity of the 
conceptual feeling which originates from it, according to the Category of 
Subjective Valuation. In the next section, this Categoreal Condition of 
'Conceptual Valuation' is considered in relation to all physical feelings, 
'pure' and 'hybrid' alike. The present section will only anticipate that dis- 
cussion so far as hybrid feelings are concerned. Thus the part of the general 
category now relevant can be formulated: 

[377] A hybrid physical feeling originates for its subject a conceptual 
feeling with the same datum as that of the conceptual feeling of the ante- 
cedent subject. But the two conceptual feelings in the two subjects re- 
spectively may have different subjective forms. 

There is an autonomy in the formation of the subjective forms of con- 
ceptual feelings, conditioned only by the unity of the subject as expressed 
in categoreal conditions I, VII, and VIII. These conditions for unity cor- 
relate the sympathetic subjective form of the hybrid feeling with the 
autonomous subjective form of the derivative conceptual feeling with the 
same subject. 

There are evidently two sub-species of hybrid feelings: (i) those which 
feel the conceptual feelings of temporal actual entities, and (ii) those 
which feel the conceptual feelings of God. 

The objectification of God in a temporal subject is effected by the hy- 



The Transmission of Feelings 247 

brid feelings with God's conceptual feelings as data. Those of God's feel- 
ings which are positively prehended are those with some compatibility of 
contrast, or of identity, with physical feelings transmitted from the tem- 
poral world. But when we take God into account, then we can assert with- 
out any qualification Hume's principle, that all conceptual feelings are 
derived from physical feelings. The limitation of Hume's principle intro- 
duced by the consideration of the Category of Conceptual Reversion 
(cf. Sect. Ill of this chapter) is to be construed as referring merely to the 
transmission from the temporal world, leaving God out of account. Apart 
from the intervention of God, there could be nothing new in the world, 
and no order in the world. The course of creation would be a dead level 
of ineffectiveness, with all balance and intensity progressively excluded by 
the cross currents of incompatibility. The novel hybrid feelings derived 
from God, with the derivative sympathetic conceptual valuations, are the 
foundations of progress. [378] 

SECTION III 

Conceptual feelings are primarily derivate from physical feelings, and 
secondarily from each other. In this statement, the consideration of God's 
intervention is excluded. When this intervention is taken into account, 
all conceptual feelings must be derived from physical feelings. Unfettered 
conceptual valuation, 'infinite' in Spinoza's sense of that term, is only 
possible once in the universe; since that creative act is objectively immortal 
as an inescapable condition characterizing creative action. 

But, unless otherwise stated, only the temporal entities of the actual 
world will be considered. We have to discuss the categoreal conditions for 
such derivation of conceptual feelings from the physical feelings relating 
to the temporal world. By the Categoreal Condition of Subjective Unity- 
Category I— the initial phase of physical feelings has the propositional 
unity of feelings compatible for integration into one feeling of the actual 
world. But the completed determination of the subjective form of this 
final ''satisfaction' awaits the origination of conceptual feelings whose 
subjective forms introduce the factor of Valuation/ that is, Valuation up' 
or Valuation down/ 

Thus a supplementary phase succeeds to the initial purely physical 
phase. This supplementary phase starts with two subordinate phases of 
conceptual origination, and then passes into phases of integration, and of 
reintegration, in which propositional feelings, and intellectual feelings, may 
emerge. In the present chapter we are concerned with the first two phases 
of merely conceptual origination. These are not phases of conceptual 
analysis, but of conceptual valuation. The subsequent analytic phases in- 
volve propositional feelings, and in certain circumstances issue in con- 
sciousness. But in this chaptert we are merely concerned with blind con- 
ceptual valuation, and with the effect of such valuation upon physical 



248 The Theory of Prehensioiis 

feel- [379] ings which lie in the future beyond the actual entities in which 
such valuations occur. 

The initial problem is to discover the principles according to which 
some eternal objects are prehended positively and others are prehended 
negatively. Some are felt and others are eliminated. 

In the solution of this problem five* additional categoreal conditions 
must be added to the three such conditions which have already been ex- 
plained. The conditions have regard to the origination, and coordination, 
of conceptual feelings. They govern the general process of 'conceptual 
imagination/ so far as concerns its origination from physical experience. 

Category IV. The Category of Conceptual Valuation. From each physi- 
cal feeling there is the derivation of a purely conceptual feeling whose 
datum is the eternal object exemplified in the definiteness of the actual 
entity, or oft the nexus, physically felt. 

This category maintains the old principle that mentality originates from 
sensitive experience. It lays down the principle that all sensitive experience 
originates mental operations. It does not, however, mean that there is no 
origination of other mental operations derivative from these primary men- 
tal operations. Nor does it mean that these mental operations involve 
consciousness, which is the product of intricate integration. 

The mental pole originates as the conceptual counterpart of operations 
in the physical pole. The two poles are inseparable in their origination. 
The mental pole starts with the conceptual registration of the physical 
pole. This conceptual registration constitutes the sole datum of experience 
according to the sensationalist school. Writers of this school entirely 
neglect physical feelings, originating in the physical pole. Hume's 'im- 
pressions of sensation' and Kant's sensational data are considered in terms 
only applicable to conceptual registration. Hence Kant's notion of the 
chaos of such ulti- [380] mate data. Also Hume— at least, in his Treatise- 
can only find differences of 'force and vivacity/ 

The subjective form of a conceptual feeling is valuation. These valua- 
tions are subject to the Category of Subjective Unity. Thus the conceptual 
registration is conceptual valuation; and conceptual valuation introduces 
creative purpose. The mental pole introduces the subject as a determinant 
of its own concrescence. The mental pole is the subject determining its 
own ideal of itself by reference to eternal principles of valuation autono- 
mously modified in their application to its own physical objective datum. 
Every actual entity is 'in time' so far as its physical pole is concerned, and 
is 'out of time' so far as its mental pole is concerned. It is the union of 
two worlds, namely, the temporal world, and the world of autonomous 
valuation. The integration of each simple physical feeling with its con- 
ceptual counterpart produces in a subsequent phase a physical feeling 
whose subjective form of re-enaction has gained or lost subjective intensity 
according to the valuation up, or the valuation down, in the conceptual 
feeling. So far there is merely subjective readjustment of the subjective 



The Transmission of Feelings 249 

forms. This is the phase of physical purpose. The effect of the conceptual 
feeling is thus, so far, merely to provide that the modified subjective form 
is not merely derived from the re-enaction of the objectified actual entity. 
Also, in the complex subsequent integrations, we find that the conceptual 
counterpart has a role in detachment from the physical feeling out of 
which it originates. 

Category V. The Category of Conceptual Reversion. There is sec- 
ondary origination of conceptual feelings with data which are partially 
identical with, and partially diverse from, the eternal objects forming the 
data in the primary phase of the mental pole; the determination of iden- 
tity and diversity depending on the subjective aim at attaining depth of 
intensity by reason of contrast. 

Thus the first phase of the mental pole is conceptual [381] reproduction, 
and the second phase is a phase of conceptual reversion. In this second 
phase the proximate novelties are conceptually felt. This is the process by 
which the subsequent enrichment of subjective forms, both in qualitative 
pattern, and in intensity through contrast, is made possible by the positive 
conceptual prehension of relevant alternatives. 1 There is a conceptual con- 
trast of physical incompatibles. This is the category which, as thus stated, 
seems to limit the strict application of Plato's principle of reminiscence, 
and of Hume's principle of recollection. Probably it does not contradict 
anything that Plato meant by his principle. But it does limit the rigid 
application of Hume's principle. Indeed Hume himself admitted excep- 
tions. It is the category by which novelty enters the world; so that even 
amid stability there is never undifferentiated endurance. But, as the cate- 
gory states, reversion is always limited by the necessary inclusion of ele- 
ments identical with elements in feelings of the antecedent phase. By the 
Category of Subjective Unity, and by the seventh Category of Subjective 
Harmony, to be explained later, all origination of feelings is governed 
by the subjective imposition of aptitude for final synthesis. Also by the 
Category of Objective Identity this aptitude always has its ground in the 
two-way functionings of self-identical elements. Then in synthesis there 
must always be a ground of identity and an aim at contrast. The aim at 
contrast arises from the depth of intensity promoted by contrast. The 
joint necessity of this ground of identity, and this aim at contrast, is 
partially expressed in this Category of Conceptual Reversion, This 'aim 
at contrast' is the expression of the ultimate creative purpose that each 
unification shall achieve some maximum depth of intensity of feeling, 
subject to the conditions of its concrescence. This ultimate purpose is 
formulated in Category VIII. 

The question, how, and in what sense, one unrealized [382] eternal ob- 
ject can be more, or less, proximate to an eternal object in realized ingres- 
sion— that is to say, in comparison with any other unfelt eternal object— 

1 For another discussion of this topic, cf. my Religion in the Making, Ch. Ill, 
Sect. VII. 



250 The Theory of Prehensions 

is left unanswered by this Category of Reversion. In conformity with the 
ontological principle, this question can be answered only by reference to 
some actual entity. Every eternal object has entered into the conceptual 
feelings of God. Thus, a more fundamental account must ascribe the re- 
verted conceptual feeling in a temporal subject to its conceptual feeling de- 
rived, according to Category IV, from the hybrid physical feeling of the 
relevancies conceptually ordered in God's experience. In this way, by the 
recognition of God's characterization of the creative act, a more complete 
rational explanation is attained. The Category of Reversion is then abol- 
ished;* and Hume's principle of the derivation of conceptual experience 
from physical experience remains without any exception. 

SECTION IV 

The two categories of the preceding section concerned the efficacy of 
physical feelings, pure or hybrid, for the origination of conceptual feelings 
in a later phase of their own subject. The present section considers analo- 
gous feelings with diverse subjects 'scattered' throughout members of a 
nexus. It considers a single subject, subsequent to the nexus, prehending 
this multiplicity of scattered feelings as the data for a corresponding mul- 
tiplicity of its own simple physical feelings, some pure and some hybrid. 
It then formulates the process by which in that subject an analogy between 
these various feelings— constituted by one eternal object, of whatever com- 
plexity, implicated in the various analogous data of these feelings— is, by 
a supervening process of integration, converted into one feeling having 
for its datum the specific contrast between the nexus as one entity and 
that eternal object. This contrast is what is familiarly known as the quali- 
fication of the nexus by that eternal object. An inter- [383] mediate stage 
in this process of integration is the formation in the final subject of one 
conceptual feeling with that eternal object as its datum. This conceptual 
feeling has an impartial relevance to the above-mentioned various simple 
physical feelings of the various members of the nexus. It is this impartiality 
of the conceptual feeling which leads to the integration in which the many 
members of the nexus are collected into the one nexus which they form, 
and in which that nexus is set in contrast to the one eternal object which 
has emerged from their analogies. 

Thus pure, and hybrid, physical feelings, issuing into a single concep- 
tual feeling, constitute the preliminary phase of this transmutation in the 
prehending subject. The integration of these feelings in that subject leads 
to the transmuted physical feeling of a nexus as qualified by that eternal 
object which is the datum of the single conceptual feeling. In this way the 
world is physically felt as a unity, and is felt as divisible into parts which 
are unities, namely, nexus. Each such unity has its own characteristics 
arising from the undiscriminated actual entities which are members of 
that nexus. In some cases objectification of the nexus has only indirect 



The Transmission of Feelings 251 

reference to the characteristics of its individual atomic actualities. In such 
a case the objectification may introduce new elements into the world, for- 
tunate or unfortunate. Usually the objectification gives direct informa- 
tion, so that the prehending subject shapes itself as the direct outcome of 
the order prevalent in the prehended nexus. Transmutation is the way 
in which the actual world is felt as a community, and is so felt in virtue 
of its prevalent order. For it arises by reason of the analogies between the 
various members of the prehended nexus, and eliminates their differences. 
Apart from transmutation our feeble intellectual operations would fail to 
penetrate into the dominant characteristics of things. We can only under- 
stand by discarding. Transmutation depends upon a categoreal condition. 

[384] Category VI. The Category of Transmutation. When (in accord- 
ance with Category IV, or with Categories IV and V) one and the samet 
conceptual feeling is derived impartially by a prehending subject from 
its analogous simple physical feelings of various actual entities, then in 
a subsequent phase of integration—of these simple physical feelings to- 
gether with the derivate conceptual feeling— the prehending subject may 
transmute the datum of this conceptual feeling into a contrast with the 
nexus of those prehended actual entities, or of some part of that nexus; 
so that the nexus (or its part), thus qualified, is the objective datum of a 
feeling entertained by this prehending subject. 

Such a transmutation of simple physical feelings of many actualities 
into one physical feeling of a nexus as one, is called a 'transmuted feeling/ 
The origination of such a feeling depends upon intensities, valuations, and 
eliminations conjointly favourable. 

In order to understand this categoreal condition, it must be noted that 
the integration of simple physical feelings into a complex physical feeling 
only provides for the various actual entities of the nexus being felt as sep- 
arate entities requiring each other. We have to account for the substitu- 
tion of the one nexus in place of its component actual entities. This is 
Leibniz's problem which arises in his Monadology. He solves the problem 
by an unanalysed doctrine of 'confusion/ Some category is required to pro- 
vide a physical feeling of a nexus as one entity with its own categoreal 
type of existence. This one physical feeling in the final subject is derived 
by transmutation from the various analogous physical feelings entertained 
by the various members of the nexus, together with their various analogous 
conceptual feelings (with these various members as subjects) originated 
from these physical feelings, either directly according to Category IV, 
or indirectly according to Category V. The analogy of the physical feel- 
ings consists in the fact that their definite character exhibits the same in- 
gredient [385] eternal object. The analogy of the conceptual feelings con- 
sists in the fact that this one eternal object, or one reversion from this 
eternal object, is the datum for the various relevant conceptual feelings 
entertained respectively by members of the nexus. The final prehending 
subject prehends the members of the nexus, (i) by 'pure' physical feelings 



252 The Theory of Prehensions 

in which the members are severally objectified by these analogous physical 
feelings, and (ii) by hybrid physical feelings in which the members are 
severally objectified by these analogous conceptual feelings. 

In the prehending subject, these analogous, pure physical feelings origi- 
nate a conceptual feeling, according to Category IV; and, according to 
Category V, there may be a reverted conceptual feeling. There will be 
only one direct conceptual feeling; for the simple physical feelings (in the 
final subject) are analogous in the sense of exemplifying the same eternal 
object. (If there be no reversion, this analogy extends over the pure and 
the hybrid physical feelings. If there be important reversion, this analogy 
only extends over the hybrid feelings with the reverted conceptual feel- 
ings as data. This latter case is only important when the reverted feelings 
involve the predominantly intense valuation.) Thus these many physical 
feelings of diverse actualities originate in the final subject one conceptual 
feeling. This single conceptual feeling has therefore an impartial reference 
throughout the actualities of the nexus. Also reverted conceptual feelings 
in the nexus are, in this connection, negligible unless they preserved this 
impartiality of reference throughout the nexus. Excluding for the moment 
the consideration of reverted feelings in the actualities of the nexus, the 
hybrid physical feelings in the prehending subject also, by Category IV, 
generate one conceptual feeling with impartial reference; also it is the same 
conceptual feeling as that generated by the pure physical feelings (in the 
final subject). Thus (with no reversion) the influence of the hybrid 
physical feelings [386] is to enhance the intensity of the conceptual feeling 
derived from the pure physical feelings. But there may be reversions to 
be considered, that is to say, reversions with impartial reference throughout 
the nexus. The reversion may originate in the separate actualities of the 
nexus, or in the final prehending subject, or there may be a double rever- 
sion involving both sources. Thus we must allow for the possibility of di- 
verse reverted feelings, each with impartial reference. In so far as there 
is concordance and the reversions are dominant, there will issue one con- 
ceptual feeling of enhanced intensity. When there is discordance among 
these various conceptual feelings, there will be elimination, and in general 
no transmutation. But when, from some (or all) of these sources of im- 
partial conceptual feelings, one dominant impartial conceptual feeling 
emerges with adequate intensity, transmutation will supervene. 

This impartiality of reference has then been transmuted into the physi- 
cal feeling of that nexus, whole or partial, contrasted with some one eternal 
object. It will be noted that this one impartial conceptual feeling is an 
essential element of the process, whereby an impartial reference to the 
whole nexus is introduced. Otherwise there would be no element to trans- 
mute particular relevancies to the many members into general relevance 
to the whole. 

The eternal object which characterizes the nexus in this physical feeling 



The Transmission of Feelings 253 

may be an eternal object characterizing the analogous physical feelings, 
belonging to all, or some, of the members of the nexus. In this case, the 
nexus as a whole derives a character which in some way belongs to its 
various members. 

Again in the transmuted feeling only part of the original nexus may 
be objectified, and the eternal object may have been derived from mem- 
bers of the other part of the original nexus. This is the case for perception 
in the mode of 'presentational immediacy/ to be further discussed in a 
later chapter (Part IV, Ch. V; cf. alsof [387] Part II, Ch. II, Sect. I, and 
Part II, Ch. IV, Sect. VII, and Part II, Ch. VIII) . 

Also the eternal object may be the datum of a reverted conceptual feel- 
ing, only indirectly derived from the members of the original nexus. In 
this case, the transmuted feeling of the nexus introduces novelty; and in 
unfortunate cases this novelty may be termed 'error/ But all the same, 
the transmuted feeling, whatever be its history of transmutation, is a definite 
physical fact whereby the final subject prehends the nexus. For example, 
considering the example of presentational immediacy, colour-blindness 
may be called 'error'; but nevertheless, it is a physical fact. A transmuted 
feeling comes under the definition of a physical feeling. 

Our usual way of consciously prehending the world is by these trans- 
muted physical feelings. It is only when we are consciously aware of alien 
mentalities that we even approximate to the conscious prehension of a 
single actual entity. It will be found that transmuted feelings are very 
analogous to prepositional feelings, and to conscious perceptions and 
judgments in their sequence of integration. Vagueness has its origin in 
transmuted feelings. For a quality, characterizing the mutual prehen- 
sions of all the members of a nexus, is transmuted into a predicate of the 
nexus. The intensity arising from the force of repetition makes this trans- 
muted perception to be the prominent type of those feelings which in 
further integrations acquire consciousness as an element in their subjective 
forms. It represents a simplification of physical feeling, effected in the 
course of integration. 

According to this category the conceptual feelings entertained in any 
nexus modify the future role of that nexus as a physical objective datum. 
This category governs the transition from conceptual feelings in one actual 
entity to physical feelings either in a supervening phase of itself or in a 
later actual entity. What is conceptual earlier is felt physically later in an 
extended role. Thus, for instance, a new 'form' has its emergent ingres- 
sion con- [388] ceptually by reversion, and receives delayed exemplification 
physically when the other categoreal conditions permit. 

This joint operation of Categories IV and VI produces what has been 
termed 'adversion' and 'aversion/ For the conceptual feelings in the ac- 
tualities of the nexus, produced according to Category IV, have data 
identical with the pattern exemplified in the objective data of the many 



254 The Theory of Prehensions 

physical feelings. If in the conceptual feelings there is valuation upward, 
then the physical feelings are transmitted t to the new concrescence with 
enhanced intensity in its subjective form. This is 'adversion/ 

But if in the conceptual feelings there is valuation downward, then the 
physical feelings are (in the later concrescence) either eliminated, or are 
transmitted to it with attenuated intensity. This is 'aversion/ Thus 'adver- 
sion' and 'aversion' are types of 'decision/ 

Thus the conceptual feeling with its valuation has primarily the charac- 
ter of purpose, since it is the agent whereby the decision is made as to 
the causal efficacy of its subject in its objectifications beyond itself. But it 
only achieves this character of purpose by its integration with the physical 
feeling from which it originates. This integration is considered in Chapter 
V on 'Comparative Feelings/ 

It is evident that ad version and aversion, and also the Category of 
Transmutation, only have importance in the case of high-grade organ- 
isms. They constitute the first step towards intellectual mentality, though 
in themselves they do not amount to consciousness. But an actual entity 
which includes these operations must have an important intensity of con- 
ceptual feelings able to mask and fuse the simple physical feelings. 

Also the examination of the Category of Transmutation shows that the 
approach to intellectuality consists in the gain of a power of abstraction. 
The irrelevant multiplicity of detail is eliminated, and emphasis is laid 
on the elements of systematic order in the actual world. In [389] so far 
as there is trivial order, there must be trivialized actual entities. The right 
coordination of the negative prehensions is one secret of mental progress; 
but unless some systematic scheme of relatedness characterizes the en- 
vironment, there will be nothing left whereby to constitute vivid pre- 
hension of the world. The low-grade organism is merely the summation 
of the forms of energy which flow in upon it in all their multiplicity of 
detail. It receives, and it transmits; but it fails to simplify into intelligible 
system. The physical theory of the structural flow of energy has to do 
with the transmission of simple physical feelings from individual actuality 
to individual actuality. Thus some sort of quantum theory in physics, 
relevant to the existing type of cosmic order, is to be expected. The physical 
theory of alternative forms of energy, and of the transformation from one 
form to another form, ultimately depends upon transmission conditioned 
by some exemplification of the Categories of Transmutation and Reversion. 

SECTION V 

The seventh categoreal condition governs the efficacy of conceptual 
feelings both in the completion of their own subjects, and also in the 
objectifications of their subjects in subsequent concrescence. It is the 
Category of 'Subjectivet Harmony/ 

Category VII. The Category of Subjective Harmony. The valuations of 



The Transmission of Feelings 255 

conceptual feelings are mutually determined by their adaptation to be 
joint elements in a satisfaction aimed at by the subject. 

This categoreal condition should be compared with the Category of 
'Subjective Unity/ and also with the Category of 'Conceptual Reversion/ In 
the former category the intrinsic inconsistencies, termed logical/ are the 
formative conditions in the pre-established harmony. In this seventh 
category, and in the Category of Reversion, aesthetic adaptation for an 
end is the formative condition in the pre-established harmony. These three 
categories [390] express the ultimate particularity of feelings. For the 
superject which is their outcome is also the subject which is operative in 
their production. They are the creation of their own creature. The point 
to be noticed is that the actual entity, in a state of process during which it 
is not fully definite, determines its own ultimate definiteness. This is the 
whole point of moral responsibility. Such responsibility is conditioned by 
the limits of the data, and by the categoreal conditions of concrescence. 

But autonomy is negligible unless the complexity is such that there is 
great energy in the production of conceptual feelings according to the 
Category of Reversion. This Category of Reversion has to be considered in 
connection with the Category of Aesthetic Harmony.** For the contrasts 
produced by reversion are contrasts required for the fulfillment of the 
aesthetic ideal. Unless there is complexity, ideal diversities lead to physical 
impossibilities, and thence to impoverishment. It requires a complex con- 
stitution to stage diversities as consistent contrasts. 

It is only by reason of the Categories of Subjective Unity, and of Subjec- 
tive Harmony, that the process constitutes the character of the product, 
and that conversely the analysis of the product discloses the process. J 



CHAPTER IV 
PROPOSITIONS AND FEELINGS 

SECTION I 

[391] The nature of consciousness has not yet been adequately ana- 
lysed. The initial basic feelings, physical and conceptual, have been men- 
tioned, and so also has the final synthesis into the affirmation-negation 
contrast. But between the beginning and the end of the integration into 
consciousness, there lies the origination of a 'propositional feeling/ A 
propositional feeling is a feeling whose objective datum is a proposition. 
Such a feeling does not in itself involve consciousness. But all forms of 
consciousness arise from ways of integration of propositional feelings with 
other feelings, either physical feelings or conceptual feelings. Conscious- 
ness belongs to the subjective forms of such feelings. 

A proposition enters into experience as the entity forming the datum of 
a complex feeling derived from the integration of a physical feeling with 
a conceptual feeling. 1 Now a conceptual feeling does not refer to the actual 
world, in the sense that the history of this actual world has any peculiar 
relevance to its datum. This datum is an eternal object; and an eternal 
object refers only to the purely general any among undetermined actual 
entities. In itself an eternal object evades any selection among actualities 
or epochs. You cannot know what is red by merely thinking of redness. 
You can only find red things by adventuring amid physical experiences 
in this actual world. This doctrine is the ultimate ground of empiricism; 
namely, that eternal objects tell no tales as to their ingressions. 

[392] But now a new kind of entity presents itself. Such entities are the 
tales that perhaps might be told about particular actualities. Such entities 
are neither actual entities, nor eternal objects, nor feelings. They are prop- 
ositions. A proposition must be true or false. Herein a proposition differs 
from an eternal object; for no eternal object is ever true or false. This 
difference between propositions and eternal objects arises from the fact 
that truth and falsehood are always grounded upon a reason. But according 
to the ontological principle (the eighteenth! 'category of explanation'), 
a reason is always a reference to determinate actual entities. Now an eter- 
nal object, in itself, abstracts from all determinate actual entities, includ- 
ing even God. It is merely referent to any such entities, in the absolutely 
general sense of any. Then there can be no reason upon which to found 

1 Cf.t also 'Physical Purposes' considered in Ch. V. 



Propositions and Feelings 257 

the truth or falsehood of an eternal object. The very diversity of eternal 
objects has for its reason their diversity of functioning in this actual world. 

Thus the endeavour to understand eternal objects in complete abstrac- 
tion from the actual world results in reducing them to mere undifferen- 
tiated nonentities. This is an exemplification of the categoreal principle, 
that the general metaphysical character of being an entity is *'to be a deter- 
minant in the becoming of actualities/ Accordingly the differentiated 
relevance of eternal objects to each instance of the creative process re- 
quires their conceptual realization in the primordial nature of God. He 
does not create eternal objects; for his nature requires them in the same 
degree that they require him. This is an exemplification of the coherence 
of the categoreal types of existence. The general relationships of eternal 
objects to each other, relationships of diversity and of pattern, are their 
relationships in God's conceptual realization. Apart from this realization, 
there is mere isolation indistinguishable from nonentity. 

But a proposition, while preserving the indeterminateness of an eternal 
object, makes an incomplete abstrac- [393] tion from determinate actual 
entities. It is a complex entity, with determinate actual entities among its 
components. These determinate actual entities, considered formaliter and 
not as in the abstraction of the proposition, do afford a reason determining 
the truth or falsehood of the proposition. But the proposition in itself, 
apart from recourse to these reasons, tells no tale about itself; and in this 
respect it is indeterminate like the eternal objects. 

A propositional feeling (as has been stated) arises from a special type 
of integration synthesizing a physical feeling with a conceptual feeling. 
The objective datum of the physical feeling is either one actual entity, 
if the feeling be simple, or is a determinate nexus of actual entities, if the 
physical feeling be more complex. The datum of the conceptual feeling is 
an eternal object which is referent (qua possibility) + to any actual entities, 
where the any is absolutely general and devoid of selection. In the in- 
tegrated objective datum the physical feeling provides its determinate set 
of actual entities, indicated by their felt physical relationships to the sub- 
ject of the feeling. These actual entities are the logical subjects of the 
proposition. The absolute generality of the notion of any, inherent in an 
eternal object, is thus eliminated in the fusion. In the proposition, the 
eternal object, in respect to its possibilities as a determinant of nexus, f is 
restricted to these logical subjects. The proposition may have the restricted 
generality of referring to any among these provided logical subjects; or 
it may have the singularity of referring to the complete set of provided 
logical subjects as potential relata, each with its assigned status, in the 
complex pattern which is the eternal object. The proposition is the poten- 
tiality of the eternal object, as a determinant of denniteness, in some 
determinate mode of restricted reference to the logical subjects. This 
e ternal object is the 'predicative pattern' of the proposition. The set of 
logical subjects is either completely singled out as these logical subjects in 



258 The Theory of Prehensions 

this predicative pattern or is collec- [394] tively singled out as any of these 
logical subjects in this pattern, or as some of these logical subjects in this 
pattern. Thus the physical feeling indicates the logical subjects and pro- 
vides them respectively with that individual definition necessary to assign 
the hypothetic status of each in the predicative pattern. The conceptual 
feeling provides the predicative pattern. Thus in a proposition the logical 
subjects are reduced to the status of food for a possibility. Their real role 
in actuality is abstracted from; they are no longer factors in fact, except 
for the purpose of their physical indication. Each logical subject becomes 
a bare 'W among actualities, with its assigned hypothetical relevance to 
the predicate. 2 

It is evident that the datum of the conceptual feeling reappears as the 
predicate in the proposition which is the datum of the integral, preposi- 
tional feeling. In this synthesis the eternal object has suffered the elimina- 
tion of its absolute generality of reference. The datum of the physical 
feeling has also suffered elimination. For the peculiar objectification of 
the actual entities, really effected in the physical feeling, is eliminated, 
except in so far as it is required for the services of the indication. The 
objectification remains only to indicate that definiteness which the logical 
subjects must have in order to be hypothetical food for that predicate. 
This necessary indication of the logical subjects requires the actual world 
as a systematic environment. For there can be no definite position in pure 
abstraction. The proposition is the possibility of that predicate applying 
in that assigned way to those logical subjects. In every proposition, as 
such and without going beyond it, there is complete indeterminateness 
so far as concerns its own realization in a propositional feeling, and as 
regards its own truth. The logical subjects are, nevertheless, in fact actual 
entities which are definite in their realized mutual relatedness. Thus the 
proposition is in fact true, or false. But its own [395] truth, or its own 
falsity, is no business of a proposition. That question concerns only a 
subject entertaining a propositional feeling with that proposition for its 
datum. Such an actual entity is termed a 'prehending subject' of the 
proposition. Even a prehending subject is not necessarily judging the 
proposition. That particular case has been discussed earlier in Chapter 
IX of Part II. In that chapter the term 'judging subject' was used in place 
of the wider term 'prehending subject/ 

To summarize this discussion of the general nature of a proposition: 
A proposition shares with an eternal object the character of indeterminate- 
ness, in that both are definite potentialities for actuality with undeter- 
mined realization in actuality. But they differ in that an eternal object 
refers to actuality with absolute generality, whereas a proposition refers 
to indicated logical subjects. Truth and falsehood always require some 
element of sheer givenness. Eternal objects cannot demonstrate what they 

2 Cf . my Concept of Nature, Ch. I, for another exposition of this train of 
thought. 



Propositions and Feelings 259 

are except in some given fact. The logical subjects of a proposition supply 
the element of givenness requisite for truth and falsehood. 



SECTION II 

A proposition has neither the particularity of a feeling, nor the reality 
of a nexus. It is at datum for feeling, awaiting a subject feeling it. Its 
relevance to the actual world by means of its logical subjects makes it a 
lure for feeling. In fact many subjects may feel it with diverse feelings, 
and with diverse sorts of feelings. The fact that propositions were first 
considered in connection with logic, and the moralistic preference for 
true propositions, have obscured the role of propositions in the actual 
world. Logicians only discuss the judgment of propositions. Indeed some 
philosophers fail to distinguish propositions from judgments; and most 
logicians consider propositions as merely appanages to judgments. The 
result is that false propositions have fared badly, thrown into the dust- 
heap, neglected. But in the real world it is more important [396] that a 
proposition be interesting than that it be true. The importance of truth is, 
that it adds to interest. The doctrine here maintained is that judgment- 
feelings form only one subdivision of propositional feelings: and arise 
from the special sort of integration of propositional feelings with other 
feelings. Propositional feelings are not, in their simplest examples, con- 
scious feelings. Consciousness only arises in some integrations in which 
propositional feelings are among the components integrated. Another point 
to notice is that the physical feeling, which is always one component in 
the history of an integral propositional feeling, has no unique relation to 
the proposition in question, nor has the subject of that feeling, which is 
also a subject prehending the proposition. Any subject with any physical 
feeling which includes in its objective datum the requisite logical subjects! 
can in a supervening phase entertain a propositional feeling with that 
proposition as its datum. It has only to originate a conceptual feeling with 
the requisite predicative pattern as its datum, and then to integrate the 
two feelings into the required propositional feeling. 

Evidently new propositions come into being with the creative advance of 
the world. For every proposition involves its logical subjects; and it cannot 
be the proposition which it is, unless those logical subjects are the actual 
entities which they are. Thus no actual entity can feel a proposition, if its 
actual world does not include the logical subjects of that proposition. The 
proposition 'Caesar crossed the Rubicon' could not be felt by Hannibal 
m any occasion of his existence on earth. Hannibal could feel propositions 
with certain analogies to this proposition, but not this proposition. It is, 
farther, to be noticed that the form of words in which propositions are 
framed also includes an incitement to the origination of an affirmative 
judgment-feeling. In imaginative literature, this incitement is inhibited 
by the general context, and even by the form and make-up of the material 



260 The Theory of Prehensions 

book. Sometimes there is even a form of words designed [397] to inhibit 
the formation of a judgment-feeling, such as 'once upon a time/ The 
verbal statement also includes words and phrases to symbolize the sort of 
physical feelings necessary to indicate the logical subjects of the proposi- 
tion. But language is always elliptical, and depends for its meaning upon 
the circumstances of its publication. For example, the word 'Caesar' may 
mean a puppy dog, or a negro slave, or the first Roman emperor. 

The actual entities whose actual worlds include the logical subjects of 
a proposition will be said to fall within the 'locus' of that proposition. 
The proposition is prehensible by them. Of those actual entities which 
fall within the locus of a proposition, only some will prehend it positively. 
There are two kinds of pure propositional feelings, namely, 'imaginative 
feelings' and 'perceptive feelings/ These kinds are not sharply distin- 
guished, but their extreme instances function very differently. 

SECTION III 

A propositional feeling can arise only in a late phase of the process of 
the prehending subject. For it requires, in earlier phases: (a) a physical 
feeling whose objective datum includes the requisite logical subjects; and 
(/?) a physical feeling involving a certain eternal object among the deter- 
minants of the definiteness of its datum; and (y) the conceptual feeling 
of this eternal object, necessarily derivate from the physical feeling under 
heading (/?), according to categoreal condition IV; and perhaps (8), some 
conceptual feeling which is a reversion from the former conceptual feeling, 
according to categoreal condition V, involving another eternal object as 
its datum. 

The physical feeling under the heading (a) will be termed the 'indica- 
tive feeling'; the physical feeling under heading (/?) will be called the 
'physical recognition/ The physical recognition is the physical basis of the 
conceptual feeling which provides the predicative pattern. 

[398] The 'predicative pattern' is either the eternal object which is the 
datum of the conceptual feeling under the heading (y), or it is the eternal 
object which is the datum of the conceptual feeling under the heading (8). 
In the former case, the second conceptual feeling, namely, that under the 
heading (8), is irrelevant to the consideration of the propositional feeling. 
In either case, that conceptual feeling whose datum is the predicative 
pattern is called the 'predicative feeling/ 

In this account of the origin of the predicative feeling, we are in gen- 
eral agreement with Locke and Hume, who hold that every conceptual 
feeling has a physical basis. But Hume lays down the principle that all 
eternal objects are first felt physically, and thus would only allow of the 
origination of the predicative feeling under heading (y). However he 
makes two concessions which ruin his general principle. For he allows the 
independent origination of intermediate 'shades' in a scale of shades, and 



Propositions and Feelings 261 

also of new 'manners' of pattern. Both of these cases are allowed for by 
the principle of 'reversion/ which is appealed to under heading (8). The 
propositional feeling arises in the later phase in which there is integration 
of the 'indicative feeling' with the 'predicative feeling/ In this integra- 
tion the two data are synthesized by a double elimination involving both 
data. The actual entities involved in the datum of the indicative feeling 
are reduced to a bare multiplicity in which each is a bare 'it' with the elimi- 
nation of the eternal object really constituting the definiteness of that 
nexus. But the integration rescues them from this mere multiplicity by 
placing them in the unity of a proposition with the given predicative! 
pattern. Thus the actualities, which were first felt as sheer matter of fact, 
have been transformed into a set of logical subjects with the potentiality 
for realizing an assigned predicative pattern. The predicative pattern has 
also been limited by elimination. For as a datum in the conceptual feeling, 
it held its possibility for realization in respect to absolutely any actual en- 
tities; but in [399] the proposition its possibilities are limited to just 
these logical subjects. 

The subjective form of the propositional feeling will depend on cir- 
cumstances, according to categoreal condition VII. It may, or may not, 
involve consciousness; it may, or may not, involve judgment. It will involve 
aversion, or adversion, that is to say, decision. The subjective form will 
only involve consciousness when the 'affirmation-negation* contrast has 
entered into it. In other words, consciousness enters into the subjective 
forms of feelings, when those feelings are components in an integral feel- 
ing whose datum is the contrast between a nexus which is, and a propo- 
sition which in its own nature negates the decision of its truth or false- 
hood. The logical subjects of the proposition are the actual entities in the 
nexus. Consciousness is the way of feeling that particular real nexus, as in 
contrast with imaginative freedom about it. The consciousness may con- 
fer importance upon what the real thing is, or upon what the imagination 
is, or upon both. 

SECTION IV 

A proposition, as such, is impartial between its prehending subjects, 
and in its own nature it does not fully determine the subjective forms of 
such prehensions. But the different propositional feelings, with the same 
proposition as datum, in different prehending subjects, are widely different 
according to differences of their histories in these subjects. They can be 
divided into two main types, here termed, respectively, 'perceptive feel- 
ings' and 'imaginative feelings/ This difference is founded on the com- 
parison between the 'indicative feeling' from which the logical subjects 
are derived, and the 'physical recognition' from which the predicative 
pattern is derived. 

[400] t These physical feelings are either identical or different. If they 



262 The Theory of Prehensions 

be one and the same feeling, the derived propositional feeling is here 
called a 'perceptive feeling/ For in this case, as will be seen, the proposi- 
tion predicates of its logical subjects a character derived from the way in 
which they are physically felt by that prehending subject. 

If the physical feelings be different, the derived propositional feeling 
is here called an 'imaginative feeling: For in this case, as will be seen, the 
proposition predicates of its logical subjects a character without any guar- 
antee of close relevance to the logical subjects. Since these physical feel- 
ings are complex, there are degrees of difference between them. Two 
physical feelings may be widely diverse or almost identical. Thus the 
distinction between the two types of propositional feelings is not as sharp- 
cut as it might be. This distinction is still further blurred by noting that 
three distinct cases arise which differentiate perceptive feelings into three 
species, which in their turn shade off into each other. 

Since we are now dealing with perceptive feelings, we have on hand only 
one physical feeling which enjoys the role both of the indicative feeling, 
and of the physical recognition. In the first place, suppose that the predica- 
tive pattern is derived straight from the physical recognition under the 
heading (y), so that there is no reversion and the heading (8) is irrelevant. 
In this case the derived propositional feeling will be termed an 'authen- 
tic perceptive feeling/ Such a feeling, by virtue of its modes of origination, 
has as its datum a proposition whose predicate is in some way realized in 
the real nexus of its [401] logical subjects. Thus the proposition felt pro- 
poses a predicate derived from the real nexus, and not refracted by the 
prehending subject. But nevertheless the proposition need not be true, so 
far as concerns the way in which it implicates the logical subjects with 
the predicate. For the primary physical feeling of that nexus by the pre- 
hending subject may have involved 'transmutation' according to categoreal 
condition VI. In this case, the proposition ascribes to its logical subjects 
the physical enjoyment of a nexus with the definition of its predicate; 
whereas that predicate may have only been enjoyed conceptually by these 
logical subjects. Thus, what the proposition proposes as a physical fact 
in the nexus, was in truth only a mental fact. Unless it is understood for 
what it is, error arises. Such understanding belongs to the subjective form. 

But if the primary physical feeling involves no reversion in any stage, 
then the predicate of the proposition is that eternal object which con- 
stitutes the definiteness of that nexus. In this case, the proposition is, with- 
out qualification, true. The authentic perceptive feeling will then be 
termed 'direct/ Thus there are 'indirect' perceptive feelings (when 're- 
version' is involved), and 'direct' perceptive feelings; and feelings of both 
these species are termed 'authentic/ In the case of these 'authentic' feelings, 
the predicate has realization in the nexus, physically or ideally, apart from 
any reference to the prehending subject. 

+ Thirdly, and lastly, the predicative feeling may have arisen in the pre- 
hending subject by reversion, according to the heading (8) of the previous 



Propositions and Feelings 263 

section. In this case the predicate has in it some elements which really 
contribute to the definiteness of the nexus; but it has also some elements 
which contrast with corresponding elements in the nexus. These latter 
elements have been introduced in the concrescence of the prehending 
subject. The predicate is thus distorted from the truth by the subjectivity 
of the prehending subject. Such a perceptive feeling will be termed 'un- 
authentic/ 

Unauthentic feelings are feelings derived from a 'tied' imagination, in 
the sense that there is only one physical basis for the whole origination, 
namely, that physical feeling which is both the 'indicative' feeling! and 
the 'physical recognition/ The imagination is tied to one ultimate fact. 

SECTION V 

Imaginative feelings belong to the general case when the indicative 
feeling and the physical recognition differ. [402] But there are degrees 
of difference, which can vary from the case when the two nexus, forming 
the objective data of the two feelings respectively, enjoy the extreme of 
remote disconnection, to the case at the other extreme when the two 
nexus are almost identical. But in so far as there is diversity between the 
feelings, there is some trace of a free imagination. The proposition which 
is the objective datum of an imaginative feeling has a predicate derived, 
with or without reversions, from a nexus which in some respects differs 
from the nexus providing the logical subjects. Thus the proposition is felt 
as an imaginative notion concerning its logical subjects. The proposition 
in its own nature gives no suggestion as to how it should be felt. In one 
prehending subject it may be the datum of a perceptive feeling, and in 
another prehending subject it may be the datum of an imaginative feeling. 
But the subjective forms of the two feelings will differ according to the 
differences in the histories of the origination of those feelings in their 
respective subjects. 

The subjective forms of propositional feelings are dominated by valua- 
tion, rather than by consciousness. In a pure propositional feeling the 
logical subjects have preserved their indicated particularity, but have lost 
their own real modes of objectification. The subjective form lies in the 
twilight zone between pure physical feeling and the clear consciousness 
which apprehends the contrast between physical feeling and imagined 
possibility. A propositional feeling is a lure to creative emergence in the 
transcendent future. When it is functioning as a lure, the propositional 
feeling about the logical subjects of the proposition may in some subse- 
quent phase promote decision involving intensification of some physical 
reeling of those subjects in the nexus. Thus, according to the various 
categoreal conditions, propositions intensify, attenuate, inhibit, or trans- 
mute, without necessarily entering into clear consciousness, or encounter- 
ing judgment. 



264 The Theory of Prehensions 

It follows that in the pursuit of truth even physical [403] feelings must 
be criticized, since their evidence is not final apart from an analysis of 
their origination. This conclusion merely confirms what is a commonplace 
in all scientific investigation, that we can never start from dogmatic cer- 
tainty. Such certainty is always an ideal to which we approximate as the 
result of critical analysis. When we have verified that we depend upon an 
authentic perceptive feeling, whose origination involves no reversions, 
then we know that the proposition which is the datum of that feeling is 
true. Thus there can be no immediate guarantee of the truth of a propo- 
sition, by reason of the mode of origination of the propositional feeling, 
apart from a critical scrutiny of that mode of origination. 

The feeling has to be (i) perceptive, (ii) authentic, and (iii) direct, 
where a definite meaning has, in the preceding section, been assigned to 
each of these conditions. 

t There is, however, always this limitation to the security of direct 
knowledge, based on direct physical feeling, namely, that the creative 
emergence can import into the physical feelings of the actual world 
pseudo-determinants which arise from the concepts entertained in that 
actual world, and not from the physical feelings in that world. 

This possibility of error is peculiarly evident in the case of that special 
class of physical feelings which belong to the mode of 'presentational 
immediacy/ 

The proposition which is the datum of an imaginative feeling may be 
true. The two questions of the origination of consciousness in the sub- 
jective forms of feelings, and of the intuitive judgment of a proposition, 
apart from the mode of origination of the feeling of it, must now be 
considered. 

SECTION VI 

Language, as usual, is always ambiguous as to the exact proposition 
which it indicates. Spoken language is merely a series of squeaks. Its func- 
tion is (a) to arouse in the prehending subject some physical feeling in- 
dicative of the logical subjects of the proposition, (/?) to arouse in the 
prehending subject some physical feeling which plays the part of the 
'physical recognition/ (y) to promote the sublimation of the 'physical 
recognition' into the conceptual 'predicative feeling/ (8) to promote the 
integration of the indicative feeling and the predicative feeling into the 
required propositional feeling. But in this complex function there is always 
a tacit reference to [404] the environment of the occasion of utterance. 
Consider the traditional example, 'Socrates is mortal/ 

This proposition may mean It is mortal/ In this case the word 'Socrates' 
in the circumstances of its utterance merely promotes a physical feeling 
indicating the it which is mortal. 

The proposition may mean 'It is Socratic and mortal'; where 'Socratic 
is an additional element in the predicative pattern. 



Propositions and Feelings 265 

We now turn to the words denoting the predicative pattern, namely, 
either 'mortal,' or 'Socratic and mortal.' The slightest consideration dis- 
closes the fact that it is pure convention to suppose that there is only 
one logical subject to the proposition. The word 'mortal' means a certain 
relationship to the general nexus of actual entities in this world which isf 
possible for any one of the actual entities. 'Mortal' does not mean 'mortal 
in any possible world/ it means 'mortal in this world.' Thus there is a 
general reference to this actual world as exemplifying a scheme of things 
which render 'mortality' realizable in it. 

The word 'Socratic' means 'realizing the Socratic predicate in Athenian 
society.' It does not mean 'Socratic, in any possible world'; nor does it 
mean 'Socratic, anywhere in this world': it means 'Socratic, in Athens.' 
Thus 'Socratic,' as here used, refers to a society of actual entities realizing 
certain general systematic properties such that the Socratic predicate is 
realizable in that environment. Also the 'Athenian society' requires that 
this actual world exemplifies a certain systematic scheme, amid which 
'Athenianism' is realizable. 

Thus in the one meaning of the phrase 'Socrates is mortal,' the logical 
subjects are one singular It (Socrates) and the actual entities of this actual 
world, forming a society amid which mortality is realizable and including 
the former 'IV In the other meaning, there are also included among the 
logical subjects the actual entities forming the Athenian society. These 
actual entities are [405] required for the realization of the predicative 
pattern 'Socratic and mortal' and are the definitely indicated logical sub- 
jects. They also require that the general scheme of this actual world be 
such as to support 'Athenianism' in conjunction with 'mortality .'+ 



CHAPTER V 
THE HIGHER PHASES OF EXPERIENCE 

SECTION I 

[406] 'Comparative feelings' are the result of integrations not yet con- 
sidered: their data are generic contrasts. The infinite variety of the more 
complex feelings come under the heading 'comparative feelings/ 

We have now to examine two simple types of comparative feelings. 
One type arises from the integration of a 'propositional feeling' with the 
'indicative feeling' from which it is partly derived. Feelings of this type 
will be termed 'intellectual feelings/ This type of comparative feelings is 
subdivided into two species: one species consists of 'conscious percep- 
tions'; and the other species consists of 'intuitive judgments/ The sub- 
jective forms of intuitive judgments also involve consciousness. Thus 
'conscious perceptions' and 'intuitive judgments' are alike 'intellectual 
feelings/ Comparative feelings of the other type are termed 'physical pur- 
poses/ Such a feeling arises from the integration of a conceptual feeling 
with the basic physical feeling from which it is derived, either directly 
according to categoreal condition IV (the Category of Conceptual Valua- 
tion), or indirectly according to categoreal condition V (the Category 
of Conceptual Reversion). But this integration is a more primitive type 
of integration than that which produces, from the same basic physical 
feeling, the species of propositional feelings termed 'perceptive/ The 
subjective forms of these physical purposes are either 'adversions' or 
'aversions/ The subjective forms of physical purposes do not involve 
consciousness unless these feelings acquire integration with conscious 
perceptions or intuitive judgments. \407] 

SECTION II 

In an intellectual feeling the datum is the generic contrast between a 
nexus of actual entities and a proposition with its logical subjects mem 
bers of the nexus. In every generic contrast its unity arises from the two- 
way functioning of certain entities which are components in each of the 
contrasted factors. This unity expresses the conformation to the second 
categoreal condition (the Category of Objective Identity). The common 
'subject' entertaining the two feelings effects an integration whereby each 
of these actual entities obtains its one role of a two-way functioning in 
the one generic contrast. As an element in the subject no objectified actual 

266 



The Higher Phases of Experience 267 

entity can play two disconnected parts. There can only be one analysable 
part. Thus what in origination is describable as a pair of distinct ways of 
functioning of each actual entity in the two factors of the generic con- 
trast respectivelyt is realized in the subject as one r61e with a two-way 
aspect. This two-way aspect is unified as 'contrast/ This one analysable 
part involves in itself the contrast between the sheer matter of fact, namely, 
what the objectified actual entity in question contributes to the objecti- 
fied nexus in the physical feeling, and the mere potentiality of the same 
actual entity for playing its assigned part in the predicative pattern of the 
proposition, in the eventuality of the proposition's realization. This con- 
trast is what has been termed the 'affirmation-negation contrast/ It is the 
contrast between the affirmation of objectified fact in the physical feeling, 
and the mere potentiality, which is the negation of such affirmation, in 
the propositional feeling. It is the contrast between 'in fact' and 'might be,' 
in respect to particular instances in this actual world. The subjective form 
of the feeling of this contrast is consciousness. Thus in experience, con- 
sciousness arises by reason of intellectual feelings, and in proportion to 
the variety and intensity of such feelings. But, in conformity with the 
seventh [408] categoreal condition (the Category of Subjective Harmony), 
subjective forms, which arise as factors in any feeling, are finally in the 
satisfaction shared in the unity of all feelings;f all feelings acquire their 
quota of irradiation in consciousness. 

This account agrees with the plain facts of our conscious experience. 
Consciousness flickers; and even at its brightest, there is a small focal 
region of clear illumination, and a large penumbral region of experience 
which tells of intense experience in dim apprehension. The simplicity of 
clear consciousness is no measure of the complexity of complete experi- 
ence. Also this character of our experience suggests that consciousness is 
the crown of experience, only occasionally attained, not its necessary 
base. 

SECTION III 

A feeling is termed a 'belief/ or is said to include an element of 'belief/ 
when its datum is a proposition, and its subjective form includes, as the 
defining element in its emotional pattern, a certain form, or eternal object, 
associated with some gradation of intensity. This eternal object is 'belief- 
character/ When this character enters into the emotional pattern, then, 
according to the intensity involved, the feeling, whatever else it be, is to 
some degree a belief. 

This variation in the intensity of belief-character is insisted on by Locke 
in his Essay. He writes (IV, XV, 3) : 
The entertainment the mind gives this sort of propositions is called 
"belief/' "assent/' or "opinion/' which is the admitting or receiving any 
proposition for true, upon arguments or proofs that are found to per- 
suade us to receive it as true, without certain knowledge that it is so. 



268 The Theory of Prehensions 

And herein lies the difference between probability and certainty, 
faith and knowledge, that in all thef parts of knowledge there is intui- 
tion; each immediate idea, each step has its visible and certain connec- 
tion: in belief not so. 

[409] Locke's distinction between certainty and uncertain belief is ad- 
mirable. But it is not nearly so important as it looks. For it is not the im- 
mediate intuition that we are usually concerned with. We only have its 
recollection recorded in words. Whether the verbal record of a recollec- 
tion recalls to our minds a true proposition must always be a matter of 
great uncertainty. Accordingly our attitude towards an immediate intuition 
must be that of the gladiators, "morituri te salutamus," as we pass into the 
limbo where we rely upon the uncertain record. It must be understood 
that we are not speaking of the objective probability of a proposition, 
expressing its relation to certain other propositions. Comparative firmness 
of belief is a psychological fact which may, or may not, be justified by the 
objective evidence. This belief-character takes various forms from its fusion 
with consciousness derived from the various types of intellectual feelings. 

SECTION IV 

Conscious perception is the feeling of what is relevant to immediate 
fact in contrast with its potential irrelevance. This general description 
must now be explained in detail. 

"Conscious perceptions' are of such importance that it is worth while 
to rehearse the whole sequence of their origination. It will be seen that 
alternative modes of origination are involved, and that some of these 
modes produce erroneous perceptions. Thus the criticism of conscious per- 
ceptions has the same importance as the criticism of judgments, intuitive 
and inferential. 

In the first place, there is one basic physical feeling, from which the 
whole sequence of feelings originates for the 'subject' in question. From 
this physical feeling, the propositional feeling of the sort termed 'percep- 
tive' arises. The conscious perception is the comparative feeling arising 
from the integration of the perceptive feeling with this original physical 
feeling. 

[410] In the account of the origination of the 'perceptive' feeling (Part 
III, Ch. IV, Sect. IV), the various species of such feelings are analysed 
first into 'authentic' feelings and 'unauthentic' feelings; and secondly, 
'authentic' feelings are analysed into 'direct' feelingsf and 'indirect' feel- 
ings. Without qualification a direct perceptive feeling feels its logical sub- 
jects as potentially invested with a predicate expressing an intrinsic char- 
acter of the nexus which is the initial datum of the physical feeling; with 
qualification this statement is also true of an indirect feeling. The qualifi- 
cation is that the secondary conceptual feelings, entertained in the nexus 



The Higher Phases of Experience 269 

by reason of reversion (cf. categoreal condition V), have been trans- 
muted so as to be felt in the 'subject' (the final subject of the conscious 
perception) as if they had been physical facts in the nexus. Of course 
such transmutation of physical feeling only arises when no incompatibili- 
ties are involved. 

Thus, in general, a transmuted physical feeling only arises as the out- 
come of a complex process of incompatibilities and inhibitions. Apart 
from exceptional circumstances only to be found in few high-grade organ- 
isms, transmutation only accounts for physical feelings of negligible in- 
tensity. It is, however, important to note that even authentic physical 
feelings can distort the character of the nexus felt by transmuting felt 
concept into felt physical fact. In this way authentic perceptive feelings 
can introduce error into thought; and transmuted physical feelings can 
introduce novelty into the physical world. Such novelty may be either for- 
tunate or disastrous. But the point is that novelty in the physical world, 
and error in authentic perceptive feeling, arise by conceptual functioning, 
according to the Category of Reversion. 

Putting aside the case when these transmuted perceptive feelings have 
importance, consider the prehending subject with its direct perceptive 
feeling. The subject has its concrescent phase involving two factors, the 
orig- [411] inal physical feeling, and the derived perceptive feeling. In the 
earlier factor the nexus, physically felt, is objectified through its own proper 
physical bonds. There are no incompatibilities between fact and reverted 
concept to produce attenuation. The objective datum is therefore felt 
with its own proper intensities, transmitted to the subjective form of the 
physical feeling. The other factor in the integration is the 'perceptive' 
feeling. The datum of this feeling is the proposition with the actual en- 
tities of the nexus as its logical subjects, and with its predicate also de- 
rived from the nexus. The whole origination of this perceptive feeling has 
its sole basis in the physical feeling, which plays the part both of 'indicative 
feeling' and of 'physical recognition' (cf. Part III, Ch. IV, Sect. III). 

The integration of the two factors into the conscious perception thus 
confronts the nexus as fact, with the potentiality derived from itself, lim- 
ited to itself, and exemplified in itself. This confrontation is the generic 
contrast which is the objective datum of the integral feeling. The sub- 
jective form thus assumes its vivid immediate consciousness of what the 
nexus really is in the way of potentiality realized. In Hume's phraseology, 
there is an 'impression' of the utmost 'force and vivacity/ 

There are therefore two immediate guarantees of the correctness of a 
conscious perception: one is Hume's test of 'force and vivacity,' and the 
other is the illumination by consciousness of the various feelings involved 
m the process. Thus the fact, that the physical feeling has not transmuted 
concept into physical bond, lies open for inspection. Neither of these 
tests is infallible. There is also the delayed test, that the future conforms 



270 The Theory of Prehensions 

to expectations derived from this assumption. This latter test can be re- 
alized only by future occasions in the life of an enduring object, the en- 
during percipient. 

It is to be observed that what is in doubt is not the immediate percep- 
tion of a nexus which is a fragment of [412] the actual world. The du- 
bitable element is the definition of this nexus by the observed predicate. 

An unauthentic perceptive feeling arises in the subject when its own 
conceptual origination from its own basic physical feeling passed on to 
the secondary stage of producing a reverted conceptual feeling to play the 
part of predicative feeling. The physical feeling may, or may not, have also 
suffered loss of direct relevance by reason of derivation from conceptual 
reversions in the nexus. But anyhow the subject by its own process of 
reversion has produced for the logical subjects a predicate which has no 
immediate relevance to the nexus, either as physical fact or as conceptual 
functioning in the nexus. Thus the comparative feeling which integrates 
the physical feeling with the unauthentic perceptive feeling has for its 
datum the generic contrast of the nexus with a proposition, whose logical 
subjects comprise the actualities in the nexus, and whose predicate partly 
agrees with the complex pattern exemplified in the nexus and partly dis- 
agrees with it This case is really the conscious perception of a proposition 
imaginatively arrived at, which concerns the nexus and disagrees with the 
facts. The case is in fact more analogous to intellectual feelings of the 
second species, namely, to intuitive judgments. But by reason of the use 
of one basic physical feeling, in the double function of indicative feeling 
and of physical recollection, the proposition in the comparative feeling 
will have some of the vivid relevance to the nexus in the same feeling, 
which arises in the case of authentic perceptions. Practically, however, this 
case is an intuitive judgment in which there is consciousness of a proposi- 
tion as erroneous. 

SECTION V 

The term 'judgment' refers to three species among the comparative 
feelings with which we are concerned. In each of these feelings the datum 
is the generic contrast between an objectified nexus and a proposition 
whose logical subjects make up the nexus. The three species [413] are com- 
posed of (i) those feelings in the 'yes-form/ (ii) those feelings in the 
'no-form/ and (iii) those feelings in the 'suspense-form.' 

In all three species of felt contrast, the datum obtains its unity by reason 
of the objective identify of the actual entities on both sides of the con- 
trast In the yes-form' there is the further ground of unity by reason of 
the identity of the pattern of the objectified nexus with the predicate. In 
the 'no-form' this latter ground of unity is replaced by a contrast involving 
incompatible diversity. In the 'suspense-form' t the predicate is neither 
identical, nor incompatible, with the pattern. It is diverse from, and com- 



The Higher Phases of Experience 271 

patible with, the pattern in the nexus as objectified: the nexus, in its own 
'formal' existence, may, or may not, in fact exemplify both the pattern 
and the predicate. In this species of comparative feeling there is therefore 
contrast between pattern and predicate, without incompatibility. 

In intuitive judgments, as has been stated, the comparative feeling is 
the integration of the physical feeling of a nexus with a propositional feel- 
ing whose logical subjects are the actual entities in the nexus. So far as 
this general description is concerned intuitive judgments and conscious 
perceptions do not differ, and are therefore classed together as 'intellectual' 
feelings. But in the case of intuitive judgments there is a more complex 
process of origination. There are two distinct physical feelings, the in- 
dicative feeling and the physical recollection (Part III, Ch. IV, Sect. III). 
The predicative feeling originates from the physical recollection, either 
immediately according to categoreal condition IV or mediately according 
to categoreal condition V. The integration of the predicative feeling with 
the indicative feeling produces the 'imaginative feeling' f (cf. Part III, 
Ch. IV, Sect. V). This is a propositional feeling with the logical subjects 
of its datum* derived from the indicative feelingf and with the predica- 
tive pattern derived from the! physical recollection. These two physical 
feelings may be relatively \414) disconnected in their origination. Thus the 
imaginative feeling may have in its subjective form no bias as to belief or 
disbelief; or, if there be such bias, the intensity of the emotion may be 
slight. 

The intuitive judgment is the comparative feeling with its datum con- 
stituted by the generic contrast between the nexus involved in the indica- 
tive feeling and the proposition involved in the imaginative feeling. In this 
generic contrast each actual entity has its contrast of two-way functioning. 
One way is its functioning in the exemplified pattern of the nexus, and 
the other way is its functioning in the potential pattern of the proposition. 
If in addition to the contrast between exemplification and potentiality, 
there be identity as to pattern and predicate, then by the Category of Ob- 
jective Unity there is also the single complex eternal object in its two- 
way functioning, namely, as exemplified and as potential. In this case, the 
proposition coheres with the nexus and this coherence is its truth. Thus 
'truth' is the absence of incompatibility or of any 'material contrast' in 
the patterns of the nexus and of the proposition in their generic contrast. 
The sole contrast, involving the Category of Objective Diversity, is merely 
that between exemplification and potentiality, and in all other respects 
the coherence is governed by the Category of Objective Identity. 

If a contrast arise in any respect other than that between exemplifica- 
tion and potentiality, then the two patterns are not identical. Then the 
proposition in some sense, important or unimportant, is not felt as true. 

It will be noted that the intuitive judgment in its subjective form con- 
forms to what there is to feel in its datum. Thus error cannot arise from 
the subjective form of the integration constituting the judgment. But it 



272 The Theory of Prehensions 

can arise because the indicative feeling, which is one of the factors in- 
tegrated, may in its origin have involved [415] reversion. Thus error arises 
by reason of operations which lie below consciousness, though they may 
emerge into consciousness and lie open for criticism. 

Finally, what differentiates an intuitive judgment from a conscious 
perception is that a conscious perception is the outcome of an originative 
process which has its closest possible restriction to the fact, thus con- 
sciously perceived. But the distinction between the two species is not 
absolute. Among the conscious perceptions we find transmutations by 
which concepts entertained in the nexus are transmuted into physical 
feelings in the nexus, and also the unauthentic propositional feelings in 
which a proposition with a 'reverted' predicate has arisen. These are cases 
in which conscious perceptions take on the general character of intuitive 
judgments. On the other hand the diversity between the two physical 
feelings— when they are diverse— may be trivial. The nexus which is the 
datum of the one may be practically identical with the nexus which is 
the datum of the other. In such a case an intuitive judgment approximates 
to a conscious perception. 

The condensed analysis of the stages of origination of an intuitive judg- 
ment is (i) the 'physical recollection' and the 'indicative feeling/ (ii) the 
'predicative feeling/ derived from the 'physical recollection/ f (iii) the 
'imaginative feeling/I derived by integration of the 'predicative feeling' 
with the 'indicative feeling/ (iv) the 'intuitive judgment/ f derived by 
integration of the 'imaginative feeling' with the 'indicative feeling.' t 

It is a great mistake to describe the subjective form of an intuitive 
judgment as necessarily including definite belief or disbelief in the propo- 
sition. Three cases arise. The generic contrast which is the datum of the 
intuitive judgment may exhibit the predicate of the proposition as exem- 
plified in the objectified nexus. In this case, the subjective form will in- 
clude definite belief. Secondly, the predicate may be exhibited as incom- 
patible with the [416] eternal objects exemplified in the objectified nexus. 
In this case, the subjective form will include definite disbelief. But there is 
a third case, which is in fact the more usual one: the predicate may be 
exhibited as irrelevant, wholly or partially, to the eternal objects exem- 
plified in the objectified nexus. In this case, the subjective form need ex- 
hibit neither belief nor disbelief. It may include one or the othert of these 
decisions, but it need not do so. This third case will be termed the case 
of 'suspended judgment,' Thus an intuitive judgment may be a belief, or 
a disbelief, or a suspended judgment It is the task of the inferential pro- 
cess sometimes to convert a suspended judgment into a belief, or a dis- 
belief, so far as the final satisfaction is concerned. 

But the main function of intellectual feelings is neither belief, nor dis- 
belief, nor even suspension of judgment. The main function of these 
feelings is to heighten the emotional intensity accompanying the valua- 
tions in the conceptual feelings involved, and in the mere* physical 



The Higher Phases of Experience 273 

purposes which are more primitive than any intellectual feelings. They per- 
form this function by the sharp-cut way in which they limit abstract 
valuation to express possibilities relevant to definite logical subjects. 
In so far as these logical subjects, by reason of other prehensions, are 
topics of interest, the proposition becomes a lure for the conditioning of 
creative action. In other words, its prehension effects a modification of the 
subjective aim. 

Intellectual feelings, in their primary function, are concentration of 
attention involving increase of importance. This concentration of atten- 
tion also introduces the criticism of physical purposes, which is the intel- 
lectual judgment of truth or falsehood. But intellectual feelings are not 
to be understood unless it be remembered that they already find at work 
'physical purposes' more primitive than themselves. Consciousness follows, 
and does not precede, the entry of the conceptual prehensions of the 
relevant universals. [417] 

SECTION VI 

It is evident that an affirmative intuitive judgment is very analogous to 
a conscious perception. A conscious perception is a very simplified type 
of affirmative intuitive judgment; and a direct affirmative intuitive judg- 
ment is a very sophisticated case of conscious perception. The difference 
between the two has its origin in the fact that one involves a perceptive 
feeling, and the other involves an imaginative feeling. Only one set of 
actual entities is involved in the formation of the perceptive feeling. These 
actual entities are the logical subjects of the proposition which is felt. 
But two sets of actual entities are involved in the formation of an imagi- 
native feeling. Only one of these sets provides the logical subjects of the 
proposition which is felt: the other set is finally eliminated in the process 
of origination. The difference between the two feelings, the perceptive 
feeling and the imaginative feeling, does not therefore lie in the proposi- 
tion which is felt. It lies in the emotional patterns of the two feelings. In 
either case this emotional pattern is derivative from the process of origina- 
tion. In the case of the perceptive feeling, the emotional pattern reflects 
the close connection of the predicate with the logical; subjects, throughout 
the process of origination. In the case of the imaginative feeling, this emo- 
tional pattern reflects the initial disconnection of the predicate from the 
logical subjects. This example illustrates that in the integration of feelings, 
components which are eliminated from the matter of the integral feeling 
may yet leave their mark on its emotional pattern. The triumph of con- 
sciousness comes with the negative intuitive judgment. In this case there 
is a conscious feeling of what might be, and is not. The feeling directly 
concerns the definite negative prehensions enjoyed by its subject. It is the 
feeling of absence, and it feels this absence as produced by the definite 
exclusiveness of what is really present. Thus, the explicitness of negation, 



274 The Theory of Prehensions 

[418] which is the peculiar characteristic of consciousness, is here at its 

maximum. 
The two cases of intuitive judgment, namely, the affirmative intuitive 

judgment and the negative intuitive judgment, are comparatively rare. 

These two cases of intuitive judgment, together with conscious perception, 

correspond to what Locke calls 'knowledge/ Locke's section (IV, XIV, 4)t 

on this subject is short enough to be quoted in full: 
Judgment is the presuming things to be so without perceiving it.— 
Thus the mind has two faculties conversant about truth and false- 
hood,— 

First, Knowledge, whereby it certainly perceives, and is undoubt- 
edly satisfied of the agreement or disagreement of any ideas. 

Secondly, Judgment, which is the putting ideas together, or separat- 
ing them from one another in the mind, when their certain agree- 
ment or disagreement is not perceived, but presumed to be so; which 
is, as the word imports, taken to be so before it certainly appears. 
And if it so unites or separates them as in reality things are, it is right 
judgment 

What Locke calls 'judgment' is here termed 'inferential judgment/ 
The process of origination of a suspended judgment consists in (i) the 
'physical recollection' and the 'indicative feeling/ (ii) the 'conceptual 
imagination/ derivative from the 'physical recollection/ (iii) the 'preposi- 
tional imagination/ derived by integration of the 'indicative feeling' with 
the 'conceptual imagination/ (iv) the 'suspended judgment,* derived by 
integration of the 'indicative feeling' with the 'propositional imagination/ 
the relation between the objectifying predicate and the imagined predi- 
cate} being such as to preclude either case of direct judgment. 

The suspended judgment thus consists of the integration of the imagi- 
native feeling with the indicative feeling, in the case where the imagined 
predicate fails to find identification with the objectifying predicate, or 
with [419] any part of it; but does find compatible contrast with it. It is 
the feeling of the contrast between what the logical subjects evidently are, 
and what the same subjects in addition may be. This suspended judgment 
is our consciousness of the limitations involved in objectification. If, in the 
comparison of an imaginative feeling with fact, we merely knew what is 
and what is not, then we should have no basis for discovering the work of 
objectification in effecting omissions from the formal constitutions of 
things. It is this additional knowledge of the compatibility of what we 
imagine with what we physically feel, that gives this information. We must 
not oversimplify the formal constitutions of the higher grade of acts of 
concrescence by construing a suspended judgment as though it were a 
negative judgment. Our whole progress in scientific theory, and even in 
subtility of direct observation, depends on the use of suspended judgments. 
It is to be noted that a suspended judgment is not a judgment of proba- 
bility. It is a judgment of compatibility. The judgment tells us what may 
be additional information respecting the formal constitutions of the logical 



The Higher Phases of Experience 275 

subjects, information which is neither included nor excluded by our direct 
perception. This is a judgment of fact concerning ourselves. Suspended 
judgments are weapons essential to scientific progress. But in intuitive 
judgments the emotional pattern may be dominated by indifference to 
truth or falsehood. We have then 'conscious imagination/ We are feeling 
the actual world with the conscious imputation of imagined predicates 
be they true or false. 

When we compare these three cases of intuitive judgment (involving 
attention to truth) with conscious imagination (involving inattention to 
truth), that is to say, with 'imputative feeling/ we note that, except in the 
case of negative judgments, the datum of the conscious imagination is 
identical with the datum of the corresponding judgment. Nevertheless, 
the feelings are very different in their emotional patterns. One emotional 
[420] pattern is dominated by indifference to truth; and the other emo- 
tional pattern by attention to truth. This indifference to truth is other- 
wise to be expressed as readiness to eliminate the true objectifying pat- 
tern exemplified in the objective datum of the physical feeling in question; 
while the attention to truth is merely the refusal to eliminate this pattern. 
But these emotional elements in the subjective forms are not dictated 
by any diversity of data in the two feelings. For except in the case of the 
direct negative judgment, the datum is the same in both types of feeling. 
The emotional form of a feeling cannot be merely deduced from datum 
felt, though it has close relation to it. The emotional pattern in the sub- 
jective form of any one feeling arises from the subjective aim dominating 
the entire concrescent process. The other feelings of the subject may be 
conceived as catalytic agents. They are intellectually separable from the 
feeling in question. But that feeling is in fact the outcome of the subjec- 
tive aim of the subject which is its locus; and the emotional pattern is the 
peculiar way in which the subject asserts itself in its feeling. This explana- 
tion of the status of the emotional pattern is merely an application of the 
doctrine that a feeling appropriates elements of the universe, which in 
themselves are other than the subject; and absorbs these elements into 
the real internal constitution of its subject by synthesizing them in the 
unity of an emotional pattern expressive of its own subjectivity. 

This mutual dependence of the emotional pattern of a feeling on the 
other feelings of the same subjectf may be termed the 'mutual sensitivity' 
of feelings. It is also one aspect of the incurable 'particularity' of a feeling, 
in the sense that no feeling can be abstracted from its subject. 



SECTION VII 

'Physical purposes' constitute a type of comparative feelings more primi- 
tive than the type of intellectual feel- \421] ings. In general, it seems as 
though intellectual feelings are negligible, so as only to obtain importance 
in exceptional actual entities. We have no means of testing this assump- 



276 The Theory of Prehensions 

tion in any crucial way. It is however the assumption usually made; and 
therefore it may be presumed that there is some evidence which persuades 
people to embrace the doctrine. But in fact no evidence, one way or the 
other, has ever been produced. We know that there are some few entities 
on the surface of this earth with intellectual feelings; and there our knowl- 
edge ends, so far as temporal entities are concerned. 

In the more primitive type of comparative feelings indetermination as 
to its own ingressions— so prominent in intellectual feelings— is the aspect 
of the eternal object which is pushed into the background. In such a type 
of physical purposes the integration of a physical feeling and a conceptual 
feeling does not involve the reduction of the objective datum of the physi- 
cal feeling to a multiplicity of bare logical subjects. The objective datum 
remains the nexus that it is, exemplifying the eternal objects whose in- 
gression constitutes its definiteness. Also the indeterminateness as to its 
own ingressions is eliminated from the eternal object which is the datum 
of the conceptual} feeling. In the integral comparative feeling the datum 
is the contrast of the conceptual datum with the reality of the objectified 
nexus. The physical feeling is feeling a real fact; the conceptual feeling is 
valuing an abstract possibility. The new datum is the compatibility or in- 
compatibility of the fact as felt with the eternal object as a datum in 
feeling. This synthesis of a pure abstraction with a real fact, as in feeling, 
is a generic contrast. In respect to physical purposes, the cosmological 
scheme which is here being developed requires f us to hold that all actual 
entities include physical purposes. The constancy of physical purposes ex- 
plains the persistence of the order of nature, and in particular of 'enduring 
objects/ 

[422] The chain of stages in which a physical purpose originates is sim- 
pler than in the case of intellectual feelings: (i) there is a physical feeling; 
(ii) the primary conceptual correlate of the physical feeling is generated, 
according to categoreal condition IV; (iii) this physical feeling is in- 
tegrated with its conceptual correlate to form the physical purpose. Such 
physical purposes are called physical purposes of the first species. 

In such a physical purpose, the datum is the generic contrast between 
the nexus, felt in the physical feeling, and the eternal object valued in the 
conceptual feeling. This eternal object is also exemplified as the pattern of 
the nexus. Thus the conceptual valuation now closes in upon the feeling 
of the nexus as it stands in the generic contrast, exemplifying the valued 
eternal object. This valuation accorded} to the physical feeling endows 
the transcendent creativity with the character of adversion, or of aversion. 
The character of adversion secures the reproduction of the physical feeling, 
as one element in the objectification of the subject beyond itself. Such re- 
production may be thwarted by incompatible objectification derived from 
other feelings. But a physical feeling, whose valuation produces adversion, 
is thereby an element with some force of persistence into the future be- 
yond its own subject. It is felt and re-enacted down a route of occasions 



The Higher Phases of Experience 277 

forming an enduring object. Finally this chain of transmission meets with 
incompatibilities, and is attenuated, or modified, or eliminated from fur- 
ther endurance. 

When there is aversion, instead of adversion, the transcendent creativity 
assumes the character that it inhibits, or attenuates, the objectification of 
that subject in the guise of that feeling. Thus aversion tends to eliminate 
one possibility by which the subject may itself be objectified in the future. 
Thus adversions promote stability; and aversions promote change without 
any indication of the sort of change. In itself an aversion [423] promotes 
the elimination of content, and the lapse into triviality. 

The bare character of mere responsive re-enaction constituting the origi- 
nal physical feeling in its first phase t is enriched in the second phase by 
the valuation accruing from integration with the conceptual correlate. In 
this way, the dipolar character of concrescent experience provides in the 
physical pole for the objective side of experience, derivative from an ex- 
ternal actual world, and provides in the mental pole for the subjective side 
of experience, derivative from the subjective conceptual valuations cor- 
relate to the physical feelings. The mental operations have a double office. 
They achieve, in the immediate subject, the subjective aim of that subject 
as to the satisfaction to be obtained from its own initial data. In this way 
the decision derived from the actual world, which is the efficient cause, is 
completed by the decision embodied in the subjective aim,f which is the 
final cause. Secondly, the physical purposes of a subject by their valuations 
determine the relative efficiency of the various feelings to enter into the 
objectifications of that subject in the creative advance beyond itself. In 
this function, the mental operations determine their subject in its charac- 
ter of an efficient cause. Thus the mental pole is the link whereby the 
creativity is endowed with the double character of final causation, and 
efficient causation. The mental pole is constituted by the decisions in vir- 
tue of which matters of fact enter into the character of the creativity. It 
has no necessary connection with consciousness; though, where there is 
origination of intellectual feelings, consciousness does in fact enter into 
the subjective forms. 

SECTION VIII 

The second species of physical purposes is due to the origination of 
reversions in the mental pole. It is due to this second species that vibration 
and rhythm have a [424] dominating importance in the physical world. 
Reversions are the conceptions which arise by reason of the lure of con- 
trast, as a condition for intensity of experience. This lure is expressible as 
a categoreal condition. 

Categoreal Condition VIII. The Category of Subjective Intensity. The 
subjective aim, whereby there is origination of conceptual feeling, is at+ 
intensity of feeling (a) in the immediate subject, and (p) in the relevant 
future. 



278 The Theory of Prehensions 

We first note (i) that intensity of feeling due to any realized ingression 
of an eternal object is heightened when that eternal object is one element 
in a realized contrast between eternal objects, and (ii) that two or more 
contrasts may be incompatible for joint ingression, or may jointly enter 
into a higher contrast. 

It follows that balanced complexity is the outcome of this* Category of 
Subjective Aim. Here 'complexity' means the realization of contrasts, of 
contrasts of contrasts, and so on; and 'balance' means the absence of at- 
tenuations due to the elimination of contrasts which some elements in the 
pattern would introduce and other elements inhibit. 

Thus there is the urge towards the realization of the maximum number 
of eternal objects subject to the restraint that they must be under condi- 
tions of contrast. But this limitation to 'conditions of contrast' is the de- 
mand for 'balance/ For 'balance' here means that no realized eternal ob- 
ject shall eliminate potential contrasts between other realized eternal ob- 
jects. Such eliminations attenuate the intensities of feeling derivable from 
the ingressions of the various elements of the pattern. Thus so far as the 
immediate present subject is concerned, the origination of conceptual val- 
uation according to Category IV is devoted to such a disposition of em- 
phasis as to maximize the integral intensity derivable from the most fa- 
vourable balance. The subjective aim is the selection of the balance amid 
the given materials. But one element in the immediate feelings of the 
concrescent [425] subject is comprised of the anticipatory feelings of the 
transcendent future in its relation to immediate fact. This is the feeling 
of the objective immortality inherent in the nature of actuality. Such an- 
ticipatory feelings involve realization of the relevance of eternal objects as 
decided in the primordial nature of God. In so far as these feelings in the 
higher organisms rise to important intensities there are effective feelings 
of the more remote alternative possibilities. Such feelings are the con- 
ceptual feelings which arise in accordance with the Category of Reversion 
(Category Vt). 

But there must be 'balance/ and 'balance' is the adjustment of identities 
and diversities for the introduction of contrast with the avoidance of in- 
hibitions by incompatibilities. Thus this secondary phase, involving the 
future, introduces reversion and is subject to Category VIII. t Each re- 
verted conceptual feeling hast its datum largely identical with that of its 
correlate primary feeling of the same pole. In this way, readiness for syn- 
thesis is promoted. But the introduction of contrast is obtained by the 
differences, or reversions, in some elements of the complex data. The 
category expresses the rule that what is identical, and what is reverted, are 
determined by the aim at a favourable balance. The reversion is due to 
the aim at complexity as one condition for intensity. 

When this reverted conceptual feeling acquires a relatively high in- 
tensity of upward valuation in its subjective form, the resulting integra- 
tion of physical feeling, primary conceptual feeling, and secondary con- 



The Higher Phases of Experience 279 

ceptual feeling, produces a more complex physical purpose than in the 
former case when the reverted conceptual feeling was negligible. There is 
now the physical feeling as valued by its integration with the primary 
conceptual feeling, the integration with the contrasted secondary concep- 
tual feeling, the heightening of the scale of subjective intensity by the 
introduction of conceptual contrast, and the concentration of this height- 
ened intensity upon the reverted \426] feeling in virtue of its being the 
novel factor introducing the contrast. The physical purpose thus provides 
the creativity with a complex character, which is governed (i) by the 
Category of Conceptual Reversion, in virtue of which the secondary concep- 
tual feeling arises, (ii) bv the Category of Transmutation, in virtue of which 
conceptual feeling can be transmitted as physical feeling, (iii) by the 
Category of Subjective Harmony, in virtue of which the subjective forms of 
the two conceptual feelings are adjusted to procure the subjective aim, 
and (iv) bv the Category of Subjective Intensity, in virtue of which the 
aim is determined to the attainment of balanced intensity from feelings 
integrated in virtue of near-identity, and contrasted in virtue of reversions. 

Thus in the successive occasions of an enduring object in which the 
inheritance is governed by this complex physical purpose, the reverted 
conceptual feeling is transmitted into the next occasion as physical feeling, 
and the pattern of the original physical feeling now reappears as the datum 
in the reverted conceptual feeling. Thus along the route of the life-history 
there is a chain of contrasts in the physical feelings of the successive occa- 
sions. This chain is inherited as a vivid contrast of physical feelings, and 
in each occasion there is the physical feeling with its primary valuation in 
contrast with the reverted conceptual feeling. 

Thus an enduring object gains the enhanced intensity of feeling arising 
from contrast between inheritance and novel effect, and also gains the en- 
hanced intensity arising from the combined inheritance of its stable 
rhythmic character throughout its life-history. It has the weight of repeti- 
tion, the intensity of contrast, and the balance between the two factors of 
the contrast. In this way the association of endurance with rhythm and 
physical vibration ist to be explained. They arise out of the conditions 
for intensity and stability. The subjective aim is seeking width with its 
contrasts, within the unity of a general design. An intense experience is 
an aesthetic fact, and [427] its categoreal conditions are to be generalized 
from aesthetic laws in particular arts. 

The categoreal conditions, appealed to above, can be summarized thus : 1 

1. The novel consequent must be graded in relevance so as to pre- 
serve some identity of character with the ground. 

2. The novel consequent must be graded in relevance so as to pre- 
serve some contrast with the ground in respect to that same identity 
of character, 

1 My Religion in the Making, Ch. Ill, Sect. VIl.t 



280 The Theory of Prehensions 

These two principles are derived from the doctrine that an actual 
fact is a fact of aesthetic experience. All aesthetic experience is feeling 
arising out of the realization of contrast under identity. 
In the expansion of this account which has been given here, a third 
principle has been added, that new forms enter into positive realizations 
first as conceptual experience, and are then transmuted into physical 
experience. But conceptual experience does not in itself involve con- 
sciousness; its essence is valuation. 

Between physical purposes and the conscious purposes introduced by 
the intellectual feelings there lie the propositional feelings which have 
not acquired consciousness in their subjective forms by association with 
intellectual feelings. Such propositional feelings mark a stage of existence 
intermediate between the purely physical stage and the stage of conscious 
intellectual operations. The propositions are lures for feelings, and give 
to feelings a definiteness of enjoyment and purpose which is absent in 
the blank evaluation of physical feeling into physical purpose. In this 
blank evaluation we have merely the determination of the comparative 
creative efficacies of the component feelings of actual entities. In a proposi- 
tional feeling there is the 'hold up'— or, in its original sense, the epoch— 
of the valuation of the predicative pattern in its relevance to the definite 
logical subjects which are otherwise felt as definite elements in experience. 
\428] There is the arrest of the emotional pattern round this sheer fact 
as a possibility, with the corresponding gain in distinctness of its relevance 
to the future. The particular possibility for the transcendent creativity— 
in the sense of its advance from subject to subject— this particular possi- 
bility has been picked out, held up, and clothed with emotion. The stage 
of existence in which propositional feelings are important apart from in- 
tellectual feelings, may be identified with Bergson's stage of pure and in- 
stinctive intuition. There are thus three stages, the stage of pure physical 
purpose, the stage of pure instinctive intuition, and the stage of intellectual 
feelings. But these stages are not sharply distinguished. There are stages 
in which there are propositional feelings with every degree of importance 
or of unimportance; there are stages in which there are intellectual feelings 
with every degree of importance or of unimportance. Also,f even in a higher 
stage, there are whole recesses of feeling which in the final satisfaction 
acquire merely the characteristics of their own proper stage, physical or 
propositional. 



