PART IV 
THE THEORY OF EXTENSION 



CHAPTER I 
COORDINATE! DIVISION 

SECTION I 

[433] There are two distinct ways of 'dividing' the satisfaction of an 
actual entity into component feelings, genetically and coordinately. Genetic 
division is division of the concrescence; coordinate division is division of 
the concrete. In the 'genetic' mode, the prehensions are exhibited in their 
genetic relationship to each other. The actual entity is seen as a process; 
there is a growth from phase to phase; there are processes of integration 
and of [434] reintegration. At length a complex unity of objective datum 
is obtained, in the guise of a contrast of actual entities, eternal objects, 
and propositions, felt with corresponding complex unity of subjective form. 
This genetic passage from phase to phase is not in physical time: the 
exactly converse point of view expresses the relationship of concrescence 
to physical time. It can be put shortly by saying, that physical time ex- 
presses some features of the growth, but not the growth of the features. 
The final complete feeling is the "'satisfaction.' 

Physical time makes its appearance in the 'coordinate' analysis of the 
'satisfaction/ The actual entity is the enjoyment of a certain quantum of 
physical time. But the genetic process is not the temporal succession: 
such a view is exactly what is denied by the epochal theory of time. Each 
phase in the genetic process presupposes the entire quantum, and so does 
each feeling in each phase. The subjective unity dominating the process 
forbids the division of that extensive quantum which originates with the 
primary phase of the subjective aim. The problem dominating the con- 
crescence is the actualization of the quantum in solidoA The quantum is 
that standpoint in the extensive continuum which is consonant with the 
subjective aim in its original derivation from God. Here 'God' is that 
actuality in the world, in virtue of which there is physical law/ 

There is a spatial element in the quantum as well as a temporal ele- 
ment. Thus the quantum is an extensive region. This region is the deter- 
minate basis which the concrescence presupposes. This basis governs the 
objectifications of the actual world which are possible for the novel con- 
crescence. The coordinate divisibility of the satisfaction is the 'satisfaction' 
considered in its relationship to the divisibility of this region. 

The concrescence presupposes its basic region, and not the region its 
concrescence. Thus the subjective unity of the concrescence is irrelevant 

283 



284 The Theory of Extension 

to the divisibility of the [435] region. In dividing the region we are ignoring 
the subjective unity which is inconsistent with such division. But the re- 
gion is, after all, divisible, although in the genetic growth it is undivided. 

So this divisible character of the undivided region is reflected into the 
character of the satisfaction. When we divide the satisfaction coordinately, 
we do not find feelings which are separate, but feelings which might be 
separate. In the same way, the divisions of the region are not divisions 
which are; they are divisions which might be. Each such mode of division 
of the extensive region yields 'extensive quanta': also an 'extensive quan- 
tum' has been termed a 'standpoint/ This notion of a 'standpoint' must 
now be briefly explained. 

The notion has reference to three allied doctrines. First, there is the 
doctrine of 'the actual world' as receiving its definition from the immediate 
concrescent actuality in question. Each actual entity arises out of its own 
peculiar actual world. Secondly, there is the doctrine of each actual world 
as a 'medium/ According to this doctrine, if S be the concrescent subject 
in question, and A and B be two actual entities in its actual world, then 
either A is in the actual world of B, or B is in the actual world of A, or A 
and B are contemporaries. If, for example, A be in the actual world of B, 
then for the immediate subject S there are (1) the direct objectification 
of A in S, and (2) the indirect objectification by reason of the chain of 
objectification, A in B and B in S. Such chains can be extended to any 
length by the inclusion of many intermediate actualities between A 
and S. 

Thirdly, it is to be noticed that 'decided' conditions are never such as 
to banish freedom. They only qualify it. There is always a contingency 
left open for immediate decision. This consideration is exemplified by an 
indetermination respecting 'the actual world' which is to decide the con- 
ditions for an immediately novel concrescence. There are alternatives as to 
its determination, which are left over for immediate decision. Some actual 
[436] entities may be either in the settled past, or in the contemporary 
nexus, or even left to the undecided future, according to immediate de- 
cision. Also the indirect chains of successive objectifications will be modi- 
fied according to such choice. These alternatives are represented by the 
indecision as to the particular quantum of extension to be chosen for the 
basis of the novel concrescence. 

SECTION II 

The sense in which the coordinate divisions of the satisfaction are 
'feelings which might be separated has now to be discussed. 

Each such coordinate division corresponds to a definite sub-region of 
the basic region. It expresses that component of the satisfaction which 
has the character of a unified feeling of the actual world from the stand- 
point of that sub-region. In so far as the objectification of the actual world 



Coordinate Division 285 

from this restricted standpoint is concerned, there is nothing to distinguish 
this coordinate division from an actual entity. But it is only the physical 
pole of the actual entity which is thus divisible. The mental pole is in- 
curably one. Thus the subjective form of this coordinate division is de- 
rived from the origination of conceptual feelings which have regard to 
the complete region, and are not restricted to the sub-region in question. 
In other words, the conceptual feelings have regard to the complete actual 
entity, and not to the coordinate division in question. Thus the whole 
course of the genetic derivation of the coordinate division is not explicable 
by reference to the categoreal conditions governing the concrescence of 
feeling arising from the mere physical feeling of the restricted objective 
datum. The originative energy of the mental pole constitutes the urge 
whereby its conceptual prehensions adjust and readjust subjective forms 
and thereby determine the specific modes of integration terminating in 
the 'satisfaction/ 

It is obvious that in so far as the mental pole is trivial [437] as to orig- 
inality, what is inexplicable in the coordinate division (taken as actually 
separate) becomes thereby trivial. Thus for many abstractions concerning 
low-grade actual entities, the coordinate divisions approach the character 
of being actual entities on the same level as the actual entity from which 
they are derived. 

It is thus an empirical question to decide in relation to special topics, 
whether the distinction between a coordinate division and a true actual 
entity is, or is not, relevant. In so far as it is not relevant we are dealing 
with an indefinitely subdivisible extensive universe. 

A coordinate division is thus to be classed as a generic contrast. The two 
components of the contrast are, (i) the parent actual entity, and (ii) the 
proposition which is the potentiality of that superject having arisen from 
the physical standpoint of the restricted sub-region. The proposition is 
thus the potentiality of eliminating from the physical pole of the parent 
entity all the objectified actual world, except those elements derivable from 
that standpoint; and yet retaining the relevant elements of the subjective 
form. 

The unqualified proposition is false, because the mental pole, which 
is in fact operative, would not be the mental pole under the hypothesis 
of the proposition. But, for many purposes, the falsity of the proposition 
is irrelevant. The proposition is very complex; and with the relevant quali- 
fications depending on the topic in question, it expresses the truth. In 
other words, the unqualified false proposition is a matrix from which an 
indefinite number of true qualified propositions can be derived. The req- 
uisite qualification depends on the special topic in question, and ex- 
presses the limits of the application of the unqualified proposition rele- 
vantly to that topic. 

The unqualified proposition expresses the indefinite divisibility of the 
actual world; the qualifications express the features of the world which 



286 The Theory of Extension 

are lost sight of by the [438] unguarded use of this principle. The actual 
world is atomic: but in some senses it is indefinitely divisible. 



SECTION III 

The atomic actual entities individually express the genetic unity of the 
universe. The world expands through recurrent unifications of itself, each, 
by the addition of itself, automatically recreating the multiplicity anew. 

The other type of indefinite multiplicity, introduced by the indefinite 
coordinate divisibility of each atomic actuality, seems to show that, at 
least for certain purposes, the actual world is to be conceived as a mere 
indefinite multiplicity. 

But this conclusion is to be limited by the principle of 'extensive order' 
which steps in. The atomic unity of the world, expressed by a multiplicity 
of atoms, is now replaced by the solidarity of the extensive continuum. 
This solidarity embraces not only the coordinate divisions within each 
atomic actuality, but also exhibits the coordinate divisions of all atomic 
actualities from each other in one scheme of relationship. 

In an earlier chapter (Part II, Ch. IV, Sects. IV to IXt) the sense in 
which the world can be conceived as a medium for the transmission of in- 
fluences! has been discussed. This orderly arrangement of a variety of 
routes of transmission, by which alternative objectifications of an ante- 
cedent actuality A can be indirectly received into the constitution of a sub- 
sequent actuality B, is the foundation of the extensive relationship among 
diverse actual entities. But this scheme of external extensive relationships 
links itself with the schemes of internal division which are internal to the 
several actual entities. There is, in this way, one basic scheme of extensive 
connection which expresses on one uniform plant (i) the general condi- 
tions to which the bonds, uniting the atomic actualities into a nexus, con- 
form, and (ii) the general conditions to which the bonds, uniting the 
infinite num- [439] ber of coordinate subdivisions of the satisfaction of any 
actual entity, conform. 

As an example of (ii), suppose that P is a coordinate division of an 
actual occasion A. Then P can be conceived as an actual occasion with its 
own actual world forming its initial datum in its first phase of genetic 
origination. In fact, P is the hypothetical satisfaction of a hypothetical 
process of concrescence with this standpoint. The other coordinate divi- 
sions of A are either in the 'actual world' for P, or are contemporary with 
P, or are coordinate divisions of P, or have a complex relation to P ex- 
pressed by the property that each one of them is coordinately divisible 
into prehensions Q^ Q 2 . . ., such that each of them has one or othert 
of the three above-mentioned relations to P. 

Further, in addition to the merely potential subdivisions of a satisfaction 
into coordinate feelings, there is the merely potential aggregation of actual 
entities into a super-actuality in respect to which the true actualities play 



Coordinate Division 287 

the part of coordinate subdivisions. In other words, just as,f for some pur- 
poses, one atomic actuality can be treated as though it were many co- 
ordinate actualities, in the same way, for other purposes, t a nexus of many 
actualities can be treated as though it were one actuality. This is what we 
habitually do in the case of the span of life of a molecule, or of a piece of 
rock, or of a human body. 

This extensiveness is the pervading generic form to which the morpho- 
logical structures t of the organisms of the world conform. These organisms 
are of two types: one type consists of the individual actual entities; the 
other type consists of nexus of actual entities. Both types are correlated 
by their common extensiveness. If we confine our attention to the sub- 
division of an actual entity into coordinate parts, we shall conceive of 
extensiveness as purely derived from the notion of 'whole and part/ that 
is to say, 'extensive whole and extensive part/ This was the view taken 
by me in myt two earlier investigations of the [440] subject. 1 This defect 
of starting-point revenged itself in the fact that the 'method of extensive 
abstraction' developed in those works was unable to define a 'point't with- 
out the intervention of the theory of 'duration/ Thus what should have 
been a property of 'durations' became the definition of a point. By this 
mode of approach the extensive relations of actual entities mutually ex- 
ternal to each other were pushed into the background; though they are 
equally fundamental. 

Since that date Professor T. de Laguna 2 has shown that the somewhat 
more general notion of 'extensive connection' can be adopted as the start- 
ing-point for the investigation of extension; and that the more limited 
notion of 'whole and part 7 can be defined in terms of it. In this way, as 
Professor de Laguna has shown, my difficulty in the definition of a point, 
without recourse to other considerations, can be overcome. 

This whole question is investigated in the succeeding chapters of this 
Part.t Also I there give a definition of a straight line, and of 'flat' loci gen- 
erally, in terms of purely extensive principles without reference to measure- 
ment or to durations. 

SECTION IV 

An actual entity, in its character of being a physical occasion, is an act 
of blind perceptivity of the other physical occasions of the actual world. 
When we consider such an occasion morphologically, as a given entity, 
its perceptive bonds are divisible by reason of the extensive divisibility of 
its own standpoints, and by reason of the extensive divisibility of the other 
actual occasions. Thus we reach perceptive bonds involving one sub-region 
of the basic region of the perceiver, and one subdivision of the basic region 

1 Cf. The Principles of Natural Knowledge, 1919, and The Concept of Nature, 
1920, Cambridge University Press, England. 

2 Cf. Professor de Laguna'sf three articles in the Journal of Philosophy, Psy- 
chology, and Scientific Method, Vol. XIX, 1922, especially the third article. 



288 The Theory of Extension 

of the perceived. The relationship between these sub-regions involves the 
status of inter- [441] mediate regions functioning as agents in the process 
of transmission. In other words, the perspective of one sub-region from 
the other is dependent on the fact that the extensive relations express 
the conditions laid on the actual world in its function of a medium. 

These extensive relations do not make determinate what is transmitted; 
but they do determine conditions to which all transmission must conform. 
They represent the systematic scheme which is involved in the real poten- 
tiality from which every actual occasion arises. This scheme is also involved 
in the attained fact which every actual occasion is. The 'extensive' scheme 
is nothing else than the generic morphology of the internal relations which 
bind the actual occasions into a nexus, and which bind the prehensions of 
any one actual occasion into a unity, coordinately divisible. 

For Descartes the primary attribute of physical bodies is extension; for 
the philosophy of organism the primary relationship of physical occasions 
is extensive connection. This ultimate relationship is sui generis 7 and can- 
not be defined or explained. But its formal properties can be stated. Also,t 
in view of these formal properties, there are definable derivative notions 
which are of importance in expressing the morphological structure. Some 
general character of coordinate divisibility is probably an ultimate meta- 
physical character, persistent in every cosmic epoch of physical occasions. 
Thus some of the simpler characteristics of extensive connection, as here 
stated, are probably such ultimate metaphysical necessities. 

But when we examine the characteristics considered in the next chapter, 
it is difficult to draw the line distinguishing characteristics so general that 
we cannot conceive any alternatives, from characteristics so special that we 
imagine them to belong merely to our cosmic epoch. Such an epoch may 
be, relatively to our powers, of immeasurable extent, temporally and spa- 
tially. But in reference to the ultimate nature of things, it is a limited 
nexus. Beyond that nexus, entities with new relationships, unrealized in 
our experiences and unforeseen by our imagi- [442} nations, will make their 
appearance, introducing into the universe new types of order. 

But, for our epoch, extensive connection with its various characteristics 
is the fundamental organic relationship whereby the physical world is 
properly described as a community. There are no important physical rela- 
tionships outside the extensive scheme. To be an actual occasion in the 
physical world means that the entity in question is a relatum in this 
scheme of extensive connection. In this epoch, the scheme defines what 
is physically actual. 

The more ultimate side of this scheme, perhaps that side which is meta- 
physically necessary, is at once evident by the consideration of the mutual 
implication of extensive whole and extensive part. If you abolish the 
whole, you abolish its parts; and if you abolish any part, then that whole 
is abolished. 

In this general description of the states of extension, nothing has been 



Coordinate Division 289 

said about physical time or physical space, or of the more general notion 
of creative advance. These are notions which presuppose the more gen- 
eral relationship of extension. They express additional facts about the 
actual occasions. The extensiveness of space is really the spatialization of 
extension; and the extensiveness of time is really the temporalization of 
extension. Physical time expresses the reflection of genetic divisibility into 
coordinate divisibility. 

So far as mere extensiveness is concerned, space might as well have 
three hundred and thirty-three dimensions, instead of the modest three 
dimensions of our present epoch. The three dimensions of space form 
an additional fact about the physical occasions. Indeed the sheer dimen- 
sionality of space, apart from the precise number of dimensions, is such 
an additional fact, not involved in the mere notion of extension. Also the 
seriality of time, unique or multiple, cannot be derived from the sole no- 
tion of extension. 

[443] The notion of nature as an organic extensive community omits 
the equally essential point of view that nature is never complete. It is 
always passing beyond itself. This is the creative advance of nature. Here 
we come to the problem of time. The immediately relevant point to notice 
is that time and space are characteristics of nature which presuppose the 
scheme of extension. But extension does not in itself determine the special 
facts which are true respecting physical time and physical space. 

SECTION V 

The consideration of coordination and genesis raises a question wider 
than any yet discussed in this chapter. 

The theory of 'prehensions' embodies a protest against the 'bifurcation' 
of nature. It embodies even more than that: its protest is against the 
bifurcation of actualities. In the analysis of actuality the antithesis be- 
tween publicity and privacy obtrudes itself at every stage. There are ele- 
ments only to be understood by reference to what is beyond the fact in 
question; and there are elements expressive of the immediate, private, per- 
sonal, individuality of the fact in question. The former elements express 
the publicity of the world; the latter elements express the privacy of the 
individual. 

An actual entity considered in reference to the publicity of things is a 
superjecf ; namely, it arises from the publicity which it finds, and it adds 
itself to the publicity which it transmits. It is a moment of passage from 
decided public facts to a novel public fact. Public facts are, in their nature, 
coordinate. 

An actual entity considered in reference to the privacy of things is a 
'subject'; namely, it is a moment of the genesis of self-enjoyment. It con- 
sists of a purposed self-creation out of materials which are at hand in vir- 
tue of their publicity. 



290 The Theory of Extension 

Eternal objects have the same dual reference. An eternal object con- 
sidered in reference to the publicity [444] of things is at 'universal'; 
namely, in its own nature it refers to the general public facts of the world 
without any disclosure of the empirical details of its own implication in 
them. Its own nature as an entity requires ingression— positive or negative 
—in every detailed actuality; but its nature does not disclose the private 
details of any actuality. 

An eternal object considered in reference to the privacy of things is a 
'quality' or 'characteristic'; namely, in its own nature, as exemplified in any 
actuality, it constitutes an element in the private definiteness of that ac- 
tuality. It refers itself publicly; but it is enjoyed privately. 

The theory of prehensions is founded upon the doctrine that there are 
no concrete facts which are merely public, or merely private. The dis- 
tinction between publicity and privacy is a distinction of reason, and is 
not a distinction between mutually exclusive concrete facts. The sole 
concrete facts, in terms of which actualities can be analysed, are prehen- 
sions; and every prehension has its public side and its private side. Its 
public side is constituted by the complex datum prehended; and its private 
side is constituted by the subjective form through which a private quality 
is imposed on the public datum. The separations of perceptual fact from 
emotional fact; and of causal fact from emotional fact, and from per- 
ceptual fact;t and of perceptual fact, emotional fact, and causal fact, from 
purposive fact; have constituted a complex of bifurcations, fatal to a satis- 
factory cosmology. The facts of nature are the actualities; and the facts 
into which the actualities are divisible are their prehensions, with their 
public origins, their private forms, and their private aims. But the actuali- 
ties are moments of passage into a novel stage of publicity; and the co- 
ordination of prehensions expresses the publicity of the world, so far as 
it can be considered in abstraction from private genesis. Prehensions have 
public careers, but they are born privately. [445] 



SECTION VI 

The antithesis between publicity and privacy is reflected in the classi- 
fication of eternal objects according to their primary modes of ingression 
into actual entities. An eternal object can only function in the con- 
crescence of an actual entity in one of three ways: (i) it can be an element 
in the definiteness of some objectified nexus, or of some single actual entity, 
which is the datum of a feeling; (ii) it can be an element in the definite- 
ness of the subjective form of some feeling; or (iii) it can be an element 
in the datum of a conceptual, or propositional, feeling. AH other modes 
of ingression arise from integrations which presuppose these modes. 

Now the third mode is merely the conceptual valuation of the potential 
ingression in one of the other two modes. It is a real ingression into actu- 



Coordinate Division 291 

ality; but it is a restricted ingression with mere potentiality withholding 
the immediate realization of its function of conferring definiteness. 

The two former modes of ingression thus constitute the ways in which 
the functioning of an eternal object is unrestrictedly realized. But we 
now ask whether either mode is indifferently open to each eternal object. 
The answer is the classification of eternal objects into two species, the 
'objective' species, and the 'subjective' species. 

An eternal object of the objective species can only obtain ingression in 
the first mode, and never in the second mode. It is always, in its un- 
restricted realization, an element in the definiteness of an actual entity, 
or a nexus, which is the datum of a feeling belonging to the subject in 
question. 

Thus a member of this species can only function relationally: by a 
necessity of its nature it is introducing one actual entity, or nexus, into 
the real internal constitution of another actual entity. Its sole avocation 
is to be an agent in objectification. It can never be an element in [446] the 
definiteness of a subjective form. The solidarity of the world rests upon 
the incurable objectivity of this species of eternal objects. A member of 
this species inevitably introduces into the immediate subject other actu- 
alities. The definiteness with which it invests the external world may, or 
may not, conform to the real internal constitutions of the actualities ob- 
jectified. But conformably, or non-con formably, such is the character of 
that nexus for that actual entity. This is a real physical fact, with its 
physical consequences. Eternal objects of the objective species are the 
mathematical Platonict forms. They concern the world as a medium. 

But the description of sensa given above (Part II, Ch. IV,t Sect. Ill) 
will include some members of the subjective species. 

A member of the subjective species is, in its primary character, an ele- 
ment in the definiteness of the subjective form of a feeling. It is a deter- 
minate way in which a feeling can feel. It is an emotion, or an intensity, or 
an adversion, or an aversion, or a pleasure, or a pain. It defines the sub- 
jective form of feeling of one actual entity. Aj may be that component of 
A's constitution through which A is objectified for B. Thus when B feels 
A b it feels 'A with that feeling/ In this way, the eternal object which con- 
tributes to the definiteness of A's feeling becomes an eternal object con- 
tributing to the definiteness of A as an objective datum in B ? s prehension 
of A. The eternal object can then function both subjectively and relatively. 
It can be a private element in a subjective form, and also an agent in the 
objectification. In this latter character it may come under the operation 
of the Category of Transmutation and become a characteristic of a nexus 
as objectified for a percipient. 

In the first stage of B's physical feeling, the subjective form of B's feel- 
ing is conformed to the subjective form of A's feeling. Thus this eternal 
object in B's experience will have a two-way mode of functioning. It will 
be among the determinants of A for B, and it will be among [447] the 



292 The Theory of Extension 

determinants of B's way of sympathy with A. The intensity of physical 
energy belongs to the subjective species of eternal objects, but the peculiar 
form of the flux of energy belongs to the objective species. 

For example, 'redness* may first be the definiteness of an emotion which 
is a subjective form in the experience of A; it then becomes an agent 
whereby A is objectified for B, so that A is objectified in respect to its 
prehension with this emotion. But A may be only one occasion of a nexus, 
such that each of its members is objectified for B by a prehension with an 
analogous subjective form. Then by the operation of the Category of 
Transmutation, the nexus is objectified for B as illustrated by the charac- 
teristic 'redness/ The nexus will also be illustrated by its mathematical 
forms which are eternal objects of the objective species. 

SECTION VII 

The feelings— or, more accurately, the quasi-feelings— introduced by 
the coordinate division of actual entities eliminate the proper status of the 
subjects entertaining the feelings. For the subjective forms of feelings are 
only explicable by the categoreal demands arising from the unity of the 
subject. Thus the coordinate division of an actual entity produces feelings 
whose subjective forms are partially eliminated and partially inexplicable. 
But this mode of division preserves undistorted the elements of deflnite- 
ness introduced by eternal objects of the objective species. 

Thus in so far as the relationships of these feelings require an appeal 
to subjective forms for their explanation, the gap must be supplied by the 
introduction of arbitrary laws of nature regulating the relations of inten- 
sities. Alternatively, the subjective forms become arbitrary epiphenomenal 
facts, inoperative in physical nature, though claiming operative importance. 

The order of nature, prevalent in the cosmic epoch in question, exhibits 
itself as a morphological scheme in- [448] volving eternal objects of the ob- 
jective species. The most fundamental elements in this scheme are those 
eternal objects in terms of which the general principles of coordinate divi- 
sion itself are expressed. These eternal objects express the theory of exten- 
sion in its most general aspect. In this theory the notion of the atomicity 
of actual entities, each with its concrescent privacy, has been entirely 
eliminated. We are left with the theory of extensive connection, of whole 
and part, of points, lines, and surfaces, and of straightness and flatness. 

The substance of this chapter can be recapitulated in a summary: Ge- 
netic division is concerned with an actual occasion in its character of a 
concrescent immediacy. Coordinate division is concerned with an actual 
occasion in its character of a concrete object. Thus for genetic division 
the primary fact about an occasion is its initial 'dative 7 phase; for coordi- 
nate division the primary fact is the final 'satisfaction/ But with the at- 
tainment of the 'satisfaction/ the immediacy of final causation is lost, and 
the occasion passes into its objective immortality, in virtue of which efE- 



Coordinate Division 293 

cient causation is constituted. Thus in coordinate division we are analysing 
the complexity of the occasion in its function of an efficient cause. It is 
in this connection that the morphological scheme of extensiveness attains 
its importance. In this way we obtain an analysis of the dative phase in 
terms of the 'satisfactions* of the past world. These satisfactions are sys- 
tematically disposed in their relative status, according as one is, or is not, 
in the actual world of another. Also they are divisible into prehensions 
which can be treated as quasi-actualities with the same morphological 
system of relative status. This morphological system gains special order 
from the defining characteristic of the present cosmic epoch. The ex- 
tensive continuum is this specialized ordering of the concrete occasions 
and of the prehensions into which they are divisible. 



CHAPTER II 
EXTENSIVE CONNECTION 

SECTION I 

[449] In this chapter we enumerate the chief characteristics of the 
physical relationship termed 'extensive connection/ We also enumerate 
the derivative notions which are of importance in our physical experience. 
This importance has its origin in the characteristics enumerated. The defi- 
nitions of the derivative notions, as mere definitions, are equally applicable 
to any scheme of relationship whatever its characteristics. But they are 
only of importance when the relationship in question has the character- 
istics here enumerated for extensive connection. 

No attempt will be made to reduce these enumerated characteristics to 
a logical minimum from which the remainder can be deduced by strict 
deduction. There is not a unique set of logical minima from which the 
rest can be deduced. There are many such sets. The investigation of such 
sets has great logical interest and has an importance which extends beyond 
logic. But it is irrelevant for the purposes of this discussion. 

For the sake of brevity the terms 'connection' and 'connected' will be 
used in the place of 'extensive connection' and Extensively connected/ 
The term 'region' will be used for the relata which are involved in the 
scheme of 'extensive connection/ Thus, in the shortened phraseology, 
regions are the things which are connected. 

A set of diagrams will illustrate the type of relationship meant by 'con- 
nection/ The two areas, A and B, in each diagram exhibit an instance of 
connection with each other, 

[450] Such diagrams are apt to be misleading: t for one reason, because 
they introduce features as obvious, which it is our business to define in 
terms of our fundamental notion of 'connection'; for another reason, be- 
cause they introduce features which are special to the two-dimensional, 
spatial extensiveness of a sheet of paper. 

In the three diagrams of Set II, the areas, A and B, are not connected; 
but they are 'mediately' connected by the area C. 

SECTION II 

Definition Li Two regions are 'mediately' connected when they are 
both connected with a third region. 

294 



Extensive Connection 



295 




DIAGRAMS I 




(vi) 




Assumption 1. Connection and mediate connection are both of them 
symmetrical relations; that is to say, if region A is connected, or mediately 
connected, with region B, then region B is connected, or mediately con- 
nected, with region A. 

[451] It is obvious that the part of this assumption which concerns medi- 
ate connection can be proved from the terms of the definition. In the sub- 
sequent development of definitions and assumptions we shall not draw at- 
tention to such instances of the possibility of proof. 

Assumption 2. No region is connected with all the other regions; and 
any two regions are mediately connected. 

Assumption 3. Connection is not transitive; that is to say, if A be con- 
nected with B, and B with C, it does not thereby follow that A is con- 
nected with C; though in certain cases it does happen that A is connected 
with C. 

Assumption 4, No region is connected, or mediately connected, with 
itself. 

[452] This assumption is merely a convenient arrangement of nomen- 
clature. 

Definition 2. Region A is said to 'include' region B when every region 
connected with B is also connected with A. As an alternative nomen- 
clature, region B will be said to be 'part' of region A. 

This definition of 'inclusion' is due to Professor de Laguna; it constitutes 
an important addition to the theory of extension. In such investigations, 
as the present one, the definitions are the really vital portion of the subject. 



296 



The Theory of Extension 



(i) 



DIAGRAMS II t 



(ii) 




Assumption 5. When one region includes another, the two regions are 
connected. 

Assumption 6. The relation of inclusion is transitive. 

Assumption 7. A region does not include itself. 

Assumption 8. The relation of inclusion is asymmetrical: that is to say, 
if A includes B, then B does not include A. 

Assumption 9. Every region includes other regions; and a pair of regions 
thus included in one region are not necessarily connected with each other. 
Such pairs can always be found, included in any given region. 

Definition 3, Two regions are said to 'overlap/ when there is a third re- 
gion which they both include. 

Assumption 10. The relation of overlapping is symmetrical. 

Assumption J J. If one region includes another region, the two regions 
overlap. 

Assumption 12. Two regions which overlap are connected. 

Definition 4. A 'dissection' of any given region A, is a set of regions, 
which is such that (i) all its members are included in A, (ii) no two of 
its members overlap, (iii) any region included in A, but not a member of 
the set, either is included in one member of the set, or overlaps more than 
one member of the set. 

Assumption 13. t There are many dissections of any given region. 



Extensive Connection 297 

[453] Assumption 14A A dissection of a region is not a dissection of any 
other region. 

Definition 5. A region is called an 'intersect' of two overlapping regions, 
A and B, when (i) either it is included in both A and B, or it is one of the 
two regions and is included in the other, and (ii) no region, also included 
in both A and B, can overlap it without being included in it. 

Definition 6A If there be one, and only one, intersect of two regions, A 
and B, those regions are said to overlap with 'unique intersection'; if there 
be more than one intersect, they are said to overlap with 'multiple 
intersection/ 

Assumption ISA Any region included in both of two overlapping re- 
gions, and not itself an intersect, is included in one, and only one, inter- 
sect. 

Assumption 16 A If A includes B, then B is the sole intersect of A and B. 

Assumption 17 A An intersect of two regions, which is not one of the 
two regions, is included in both regions. 

Assumption 18 A Each pair of overlapping regions has at least one 
intersect. 

Definition 7. Two regions are 'externally' connected when (i) they are 
connected, and (ii) they do not overlap. The possibility of this definition 
is another of the advantages gained from the adoption of Professor de 
Laguna's starting-point, 'extensive connection/ over my original starting- 
point, 1 'extensive whole and extensive part/ External connection is il- 
lustrated by diagrams (v) and (vi) in Set I of the diagrams. So far, we 
have not discriminated between the two cases illustrated respectively by 
these two diagrams. The notion of external connection is a long step 
towards the elaboration of the notion of a 'surface/ which has not yet been 
touched upon. 

Definition 8, A region B is 'tangentially' included in a region A, when 
(i) B is included in A, and (ii) there are \454] regions which are externally 
connected with both A and B. 

Definition 9. A region B is 'non-tangentially' included in a region A 
when (i) B is included in A, and (ii) there is no third region which is 
externally connected with both A and B. 

The possibility, at this stage, of the three definitions 7, 8, and 9, con- 
stitutes the advantage to be gained by starting from Professor de Laguna's 
notion of 'extensive connection/ Non-tangential inclusion is illustrated by 
diagram (i) of the first set; and the two cases—as yet undiscriminated— 
of tangential inclusion are illustrated by diagrams (ii) and (iii). 

SECTION III 

Definition 10. A set of regions is called an 'abstractive set/ when (i) any 
two members of the set are such that one of them includes the other 

1 Cf . my Principles of Natural Knowledge, and Concept of Nature. 



298 The Theory of Extension 

non-tangentially, andf (ii) there is no region included in every member of 
the set. 

This definition practically limits abstractive sets to those sets which were 
termed 'simple abstractive sets' in iiiy Principles of Natural Knowledge 
(paragraph 37.6). Since every region includes other regions, and since the 
relation of inclusion is transitive, it is evident that every abstractive set 
must be composed of an infinite number of members. 

By reference to the particular case of three-dimensioned space, we see 
that abstractive sets can have different types of convergence. For in this 
case, an abstractive set can converge either to a point, or to a line, or to an 
area. But it is to be noted that we have not defined either points, or lines, 
or areas; and that we propose to define them in terms of abstractive sets. 
Thus we must define the various types of abstractive sets without reference 
to the notions, point, line, area. 

Definition 11. An abstractive set a is said to 'cover' an [455] abstractive 
set p, when every member of the set a includes some members of the 
set p. 

It is to be noticed that each abstractive set is to be conceived with its 
members in serial order, determined by the relation of inclusion. The 
series starts with a region of any size, and converges indefinitely towards 
smaller and smaller regions, without any limiting region. When the set a 
covers the set p 7 each member of a includes all the members of the con- 
vergent tail of p,\ provided that we start far enough down in the serial 
arrangement of the set p. It will be found that, though an abstractive set 
must start with some region at its big end, these initial large-sized regions 
never enter into our reasoning. Attention is always fixed on what relations 
occur when we have proceeded far enough down the series. The only re- 
lations which are interesting are those which, if they commence anywhere, 
continue throughout the remainder of the infinite series. 

Definition 12. Two abstractive sets are said to be 'equivalent' when each 
set covers the other. 

Thus if a and p be the two equivalent abstractive sets, and A 1 be any 
member of a, there is some member of p, B ± say, which is included in Aijf 
also there is some member of a, A 2 say, which is included in B^ also 
there is some member of p, B 2 say, which is included in A 2 ;t and so 
on indefinitely. Two equivalent abstractive sets are equivalent in respect to 
their convergence. But, in so far as the two sets are diverse, there will be 
relationships and characteristics in respect to which those sets are not 
equivalent, in a more general sense of the term 'equivalence/ The connec- 
tion of this special sense of 'equivalence' to physical properties is explained 
more particularly in Chapter IV of the Concept of Nature. 

Assumption 19 A An abstractive set is equivalent to itself. This assump- 
tion is merely a convenient arrangement of nomenclature. An abstractive 
set obviously satisfies the conditions for such reflexive equivalence. 

Definition 13. A geometrical element is a complete [456] group of ab- 



Extensive Connection 299 

stractive sets equivalent to each other, and not equivalent to any abstrac- 
tive set outside the group. 

Assumption 20 A The relation of equivalence is transitive and sym- 
metrical. 

Thus any two members of a geometrical element are equivalent to each 
other; and an abstractive set, not belonging to the geometrical element, is 
not equivalent to any member of that geometrical element. It is evident 
that each abstractive set belongs to one, and only one, geometrical element. 

Definition 14. The geometrical element to which an abstractive set 
belongs! is called the geometrical element 'associated' with that abstrac- 
tive set. Thus a geometrical element is 'associated* with each of its 
members. 

Assumption 21 A Any abstractive set which covers any member of a geo- 
metrical elementf also covers every member of that element. 

Assumption 22 A An abstractive set which is covered by any member of 
a geometrical elementf is also covered by every member of that element. 

Assumption 23 A If a and b be two geometrical elements, either every 
member of a covers every member of b, or no member of a covers any 
member of b. 

Definition IS. The geometrical element a is said to be 'incident* in the 
geometrical element 6, when every member of b covers every member of a, 
but a and b are not identical. 

Assumption 24 A A geometrical element is not incident in itself. 

This assumption is merely a convenient arrangement of nomenclature. 

When the geometrical element a is incident in the geometrical element 
6, the members of a will be said to have a 'sharper convergence* than those 
of 6. 

Definition 16. A geometrical element is called a 'point/ when there is no 
geometrical element incident in it. This definition of a 'point* is to be 
compared with Euclid's definition: 'A point is without parts.* 

[457} Definition 16.1. The members of a geometrical element are said to 
be 'prime* in reference to assigned conditions, when (i) every member of 
that geometrical element satisfies! those conditions; (ii) if any abstractive 
set satisfies those conditions, every member of its associated geometrical 
element satisfies them; (iii) there is no geometrical element, with mem- 
bers satisfying those conditions, which is also incident in the given geo- 
metrical element. 

The term 'prime* will also be applied to a geometrical element, when 
its members are 'prime* in the sense defined above. 

It is obvious that a point is, in a sense, an 'absolute* prime. This is, in 
fact, the sense in which the definition! of a point, given here, conforms to 
Euclid's definition. 

Definition 17. An abstractive set which is a member of a point will be 
called punctual.* 

Definition 18. A geometrical element is called a 'segment between two 



300 The Theory of Extension 

points P and QJ when its members are prime in reference to the condition 
that the points P and O are incident in it. 

Definition 19. When a geometrical element is a segment between two 
points, those points are called the 'end-points' of the segment. 

Definition 20. An abstractive set which is a member of a segment is 
called 'segmental/ 

Assumption 25. f There are many diverse segments with the same end- 
points; t but a segment has only one pair of end-points. 

This assumption illustrates the fact that there can be many geometrical 
elements which are prime in reference to some given conditions. There are, 
however, conditions such that there is only one geometrical element prime 
to any one of them. For example, the set of points incident in one geo- 
metrical element uniquely defines that geometrical element. Also another 
instance of uniqueness is to be found in the theory of 'flat' geometrical 
elements, to be considered in the next chapter. A particular instance of 
such 'flat' elements is afforded \458] by straight lines. The whole theory of 
geometry depends upon the discovery of conditions which correspond to 
one, and only one, prime geometrical element. The Greeks, with their 
usual fortunate intuition, chanced upon such conditions in their notions of 
straight lines and planes. There is every reason, however, to believe that, 
in other epochs, widely different types of conditions with this property may 
be important— perhaps even in this epoch. The discovery of them is ob- 
viously of the first importance. It is possible that the modern Einsteinian 
reconstruction of physics is best conceived as the discovery of the inter- 
weaving in nature of different types of such conditions. 

SECTION IV 

Definition 21. A point is said to be 'situated' in a region, when the 
region is a member of one of the punctual abstractive sets which compose 
that point. 

Assumption 26 A If a point be situated in a region, the regions, suf- 
ficiently far down the convergent tails of the various abstractive sets com- 
posing that point, are included in that region non-tangentially. 

Definition 22, A point is said to be situated in the 'surface' of a region, 
when all the regions in which it is situated overlap that region but are 
not included in it. 

Definition 23. A 'complete locus' is a set of points which compose either 
(i) all the points situated in a region, or (ii) all the points situated in the 
surface of a region, or (hi) all the points incident in a geometrical element 

A 'locus' always means a 'locus of points. 7 

Assumption 27 X A 'complete locus,' as defined in Definition 23, consists 
of an infinite number of points. 

Definition 24. When a complete locus consists of all the points situated 
in a region, it is called the 'volume' of that region; when a complete locus 
consists of all the points in the surface of a region, the locus itself is called 



Extensive Connection 301 

the 'surface* of that region; when a complete locus consists of all the points 
incident in a segment between end- [459] points, the locus is called a linear 
stretch* between those end-points. 

Assumption 28 A There is a one-to-one correlation between volumes and 
regions, between surfaces and regions, and between linear stretches and 
segments, and between any geometrical element and the locus of points 
incident in it. 

Assumption 29 A If two points lie in a given volume, there are linear 
stretches joining those two points, whose points all lie in that volume. 

Assumption 30 A If two points lie in a given surface, there are linear 
stretches joining those two points, whose points all lie in that surface. 

Assumption 31 A If two points lie in a given linear stretch, there is one, 
and only one, linear stretch with those points as end-points, whose points 
lie wholly in the given linear stretch. 

It should be noted that the terms 'volume' and 'surface* are not meant 
to imply that volumes are three-dimensional, or that surfaces are two-di- 
mensional. In the application of this theory of extension to the existing 
physical world of our epoch, volumes are four-dimensional, and surfaces 
are three-dimensional. But linear stretches are one-dimensional. 

+A sufficient number of assumptions, some provable and some axio- 
matic, have now been stated; so as to make clear the sort of development 
of the theory required for this stage of the definitions. In particular, the 
notion of the order of points in a linear stretch can now be elaborated 
from the definition of the notion of 'between/ But such investigations will 
lead us too far into the mathematical principles of geometry. + 



[S46]i An explanatory paragraph is required at the end of this chapter to 
make clear the principle that a certain determinate boundedness is re- 
quired for the notion of a region— i.e., for the notion of an extensive 
standpoint in the real potentiality for actualization. The inside of a re- 
gion, its volume, has a complete boundedness denied to the extensive po- 
tentiality external to it. The boundedness applies both to the spatial and 
the temporal aspects of extension. Wherever there is ambiguity as to the 
contrast of boundedness between inside and outside, there is no proper 
region. In the next chapter all the ovals, members of one ovate class, pre- 
serve this property of boundedness, in the same sense for each of the ovals. 
Thus in the case of Elliptic Geometry (page 330) no oval can include 
half a straight line. On page 304, Condition vii has been expressed care- 
lessly, so as to apply only to the case of infinite spatiality, i.e., to Euclidean 
and Hyperbolic Geometry. 



CHAPTER III 
FLAT LOCI 

SECTION I 

[460] Modern physical science, with its dependence on the exact no- 
tions of mathematics, began with the foundation of Greek Geometry. The 
first definition of Euclid's Elements runs, 

"A point is that of which there is no part/' 

The second definition runs, 

"A line is breadthless length." 

The fourth definition runs, 

"A straight line is any line which lies evenly with the points on itself." 

These translations are taken from Euclid In Greek, Book I, edited with 
notes by Sir Thomas L. Heath, the greatest living authority on Euclid's 
Elements. Heath ascribes the second definition "to the Platonic school, if 
not to Plato himself/' f For the Greek phrase translated 'evenly' Heath 
also suggests the alternatives 'on a footing of equality,' 'evenly placed/ 
'without bias/ 

Euclid's first 'postulate* is (Heath's translation): 

"Let the following be postulated: to draw a straight line from any point 
to any point." 

Heath points out that this postulate was meant to imply f existence and 
uniqueness. 

As these statements occur in Greek science, a muddle arises between 
'forms' and concrete physical things. Geometry starts with the purpose of 
investigating cer- [461] tain forms of physical things. But in its initial defini- 
tions of the 'point' and the 'line,' it seems immediately to postulate certain 
ultimate physical things of a very peculiar character. Plato himself ap- 
pears to have had some suspicion of this confusion when (Heath, loc. 
cit.) he "objected to recognizing points as a separate class of things at 
all."t He ought to have gone further, and have made the same objection to 
all the geometrical entities, namely, points, lines, and surfaces. He wanted 
'forms,' and he obtained new physical entities. 

According to the previous chapter, "extension' should be construed in 
terms of 'extensive connection'; that is to say, extension is a form of 
relationship between the actualities of a nexus. A point is a nexus of actual 
entities with a certain 'form'; and so is a 'segment/ Thus geometry is the 
investigation of the morphology of nexus. 

302 



Flat Loci 303 



SECTION II 



The weak point of the Euclidean definition of a straight line is, that 
nothing has been deduced from it. The notion expressed by the phrases 
'evenly/ or 'evenly placed/ requires definition. The definition should be 
such that the uniqueness of the straight segment between two points can 
be deduced from it. Neither of these demands has ever been satisfied, with 
the result that in modern times the notion of 'straightness' has been based 
on that of measurement. A straight line has, in modern times, been defined 
as the shortest distance between two points. In the classic geometry, the 
converse procedure was adopted, and measurement presupposed straight 
lines. But, with the modern definition, the notion of the 'shortest distance' 
in its turn requires explanation. 1 This notion is practically defined to mean 
the line which is the route of certain physical occurrences. 

In this section it will be shown that the gap in the old [462] classical 
theory can be remedied. Straight lines will be defined in terms of the 
extensive notions, developed in the preceding chapter; and the uniqueness 
of the straight line joining two points will be proved to follow from the 
terms of the definition. 

A class of 'oval' regions must first be defined. Now the only weapon 
which we have for this definition is the notion of regions which overlap 
with a unique intersect (cf. Def. 6 of previous chapter). It is evidently a 
property of a pair of ovals that they can only overlap with a unique inter- 
sect. But it is equally evident that some regions which are not ovals also 
overlap with a unique intersect. However the class of ovals has the prop- 
erty that any region, not a member of it, intersects some ovals with mul- 
tiple intersects. Also sub-sets of ovals can be found satisfying various 
conditions. 

Thus we proceed to define a class whose region shall have those relations 
to each other, and to other regions, which we ascribe to the class of ovals. 
In other words,! we cannot define a single oval, but we can define a class 
of ovals. Such a class will be called 'ovate/ The definition of an ovate class 
proceeds by enumerating all those peculiar properties possessed by in- 
dividual members of the class, or by sub-sets of members of the class. It will 
be found in the course of this enumeration that an extensive continuum 
which possesses an ovate class is dimensional in respect to that class. Thus 
existence of straight lines in an extensive continuum is bound up with the 
dimensional character of the continuum; and both characteristics are rela- 
tive to a particular ovate class of regions in the continuum. It seems prob- 
able that an extensive continuum will possess only one ovate class. But I 
have not succeeded in proving that property; nor is it necessary for the 
argument. 

A preliminary definition is convenient: 

1 Cf. Part IV, Ch. V, on 'Measurement.' 



304 The Theory of Extension 

Definition 0.1. An 'ovate abstractive set' is an abstractive set whose 
members all belong to the complete ovate class under consideration. 

[463] The characteristics of an ovate class will be divided into two 
groups: (a) the group of non-abstractive conditions, and (b) the group of 
abstractive conditions. 

Definition 1. A class of regions is called 'ovate/ when it satisfies the 
conditions belonging to the two following groups, (a) and (b): 

(a) The N on- Abstractive Group 

(i) Any two overlapping regions of the ovate class have a unique inter- 
sect which also belongs to that ovate class. 

(ii) Any region, not a member of the ovate class, overlaps some members 
of that class with 'multiple intersection' (cf. Def. 6 of previous chapter). 

(iii) Any member of the ovate class overlaps some regions, not of that 
class, with multiple intersection. 

(iv) Any pair of members of the ovate class, which are externally con- 
nected, have their surfaces touching either in a 'complete locus' of points 
(cf. Ch. II, Def. 23 and Ass. 27t ), or in a single point. 

(v) Any region, not belonging to the ovate class, is externally con- 
nected with some member of that class so that their surfaces touch in a 
set of points which does not form a 'complete locus/ 

(vi) Any member of the ovate class is externally connected with some 
region not of that class so that their surfaces touch in a set of points which 
does not form a 'complete locus/ 

(vii) Any finite number of regions are jointly included in some member 
of the ovate class.* 

(viii) If A and B be members of the ovate class, and A include B, then 
there are members of the class which include B and are included in A. 

(ix) There are dissections (cf. Def. 4 of the previous chapter) of every 
member of the ovate class, which consist wholly of members of that class; 
and there are dissections consisting wholly or partly of members not be- 
longing to that class. 

[464] (b) The Abstractive Group 

(i) Among the members of any point, there are ovate abstractive sets. 

(ii) If any set of two, or of three, or of four, points be considered, there 
are abstractive sets 'prime in reference to the twofold condition, (a) of 
covering the points in question, and (b) of being equivalent to an ovate 
abstractive set. 

(iii) Theret are sets of five points such that no abstractive set exists 
prime in reference to the twofold condition, (a) of covering the points in 
question, and (b) oi being equivalent to an ovate abstractive set. 

By reason of the definitions of this latter group, the extensive continuum 
in question is called 'four-dimensional/ Analogously, an extensive con- 



Flat Loci 305 

tinuum of any number of dimensions can be defined. The physical ex- 
tensive continuum with which we are concerned in this cosmic epoch is 
four-dimensional. Notice that the property of being 'dimensional* is rela- 
tive to a particular ovate class in the extensive continuum. There may be 
'ovate' classes satisfying all the conditions with the exception of the 'di- 
mensional* conditions. Also a continuum may have one number of dimen- 
sions relating to one ovate class, and another number of dimensions relat- 
ing! to another ovate class. 

Possibly physical laws, of the type presupposing continuity, depend on 
the interwoven properties of two, or more, distinct ovate classes. 

SECTION III 

Assumption 1. In the extensive continuum of the present epoch there is 
at least one ovate class, with the characteristics of the two groups, (a) and 
(b), of the previous section. 

Definition 2. One such ovate class will be denoted by a: all definitions 
will be made relatively to this selected ovate class. 

[465] It is indifferent to the argument whether or no there be an al- 
ternative ovate class. If there be, the derivative entities defined in reference 
to this alternative class are entirely different to those defined in reference to 
a. It is sufficient for us, that one such class interests us by the importance 
of its physical relations. 

Assumption 2. If two abstractive sets are prime in reference to the same 
twofold condition, (a) of covering a given group of points, and (b) of be- 
ing equivalent to some ovate abstractive set, then they are equivalent 

By reason of the importance of this proposition a proof is given. 

Proof. The two abstractive sets are either equivalent to the same ovate 
abstractive set, or to different ovate abstractive sets. In the former al- 
ternative, the required conclusion is obvious. In the latter alternative, let 
/a and v be the two different ovate abstractive sets. Each of these sets, 
/a and v, satisfies the twofold condition. We have to prove that they are 
equivalent to each other. Let M and N be any regions belonging to ju. and 
v respectively. Then since the convergent portions of the abstractive sets 
belonging to the various points of the given group must ultimately consist 
of regions all lying in M and all lying in N, it follows that M and N inter- 
sect. But, being oval, M and N have only one intersect, and all the points 
in question must be situated in it. Also this intersect is oval. Hence, by 
selecting such intersects, a third abstractive set can be found which satisfies 
the twofold condition and is covered both by //, and by v. But since 
/* and v are prime in reference to this condition, they are both of them 
equivalent to this third abstractive class. Hence they are equivalent to each 
other. Q.E.D. 

Corollary, It follows that all abstractive sets, prime with respect to the 
same twofold condition of this type, belong to one geometrical element. 



306 The Theory of Extension 

Definition 3. The single geometrical element defined, as in the enuncia- 
tion of Assumption 2, by a set of two points is called a 'straight' segment 
between those end- [466] points. If the set comprise more than two points, 
the geometrical element is called 'flat/ 'Straight 7 segments are also in- 
cluded under the designation 'flat geometrical elements/ 

If a set of points define a flat geometrical element, as in the enunciation 
of Assumption 2, it may happen that the same geometrical element is 
defined by some sub-set of those points. Hence we have the following 
definition: 

Definition 4. A set of points, defining a flat geometrical element, is said 
to be in its lowest terms when it contains no sub-set defining the same 
flat geometrical element. 

Assumption 3. No two sets of a finite number of points, both in their 
lowest terms, define the same flat geometrical element. 

Definition 5. The locus of points incident in a 'straight segment' is called 
the 'straight line' between the end-points of the segment. 

Definition 6. The locus of points incident in a flat geometrical element 
is called the 'content' of that element. It is also called a 'flat locus/ 

Assumption 4. If any sub-set of points lief in a flat locus, that sub-set also 
defines a flat locus contained within the given locus. 

Definition 6.1 A A complete straight line is a locus of points such that, 
(i) the straight line joining any two members of the locus lies wholly 
within the locus, (ii) every sub-set in the locus, which is in its lowest terms, 
consists of a pair of points, (iii) no points can be added to the locus with- 
out loss of one, or both, of the characteristics (i) and (ii). 

Definition 7. A triangle is the flat locus defined by three points which 
are not collinear. The three points are the angular points of the triangle. 

Definition 8. A plane is a locus of non-collinear points such that, (i) the 
triangle defined by any three non-collinear members of the locus lies 
wholly within the locus, [467] (ii) any finite number of points in the 
locus lie in some triangle wholly contained in the locus, (iii) no set of 
points can be added to the locus without loss of one, or both, of the 
characteristics (i) and (ii). 

Definition 9. A tetrahedron is the flat locus defined by four points which 
are not coplanar. The four points are called the corners of the tetrahedron. 

Definition 10. A three-dimensional flat space is a locus of non-coplanar 
points such that, (i) the tetrahedron defined by any four non-coplanar 
points of the locus lies wholly within the locus, (ii) any finite number of 
points in the locus lief in some tetrahedron wholly contained in the 
locus, (iii) no set of points can be added to the locus without the loss of 
one, or both, of the characteristics (i) and (ii). 

Any further development of definitions and propositions will lead to 
mathematical details irrelevant to our immediate purposes. It suffices to 
have proved that characteristic properties of straight lines, planes, and 
three-dimensional flat spaces are discoverable in the extensive continuum 



Flat Loci 307 

without any recourse to measurement. The systematic character of a con- 
tinuum depends on its possession of one or more ovate classes. Here, the 
particular case of a 'dimensional' ovate class has been considered. 

SECTION IV 

The importance of the notion of 'external connection* requires further 
discussion. 

First, there is a purely geometrical question to be noted. The theory of 
the external connection of oval regions throws light on the Euclidean 
concept of 'evenness/ A pair of ovals (cf. Sect. Ill) can only be externally 
connected in a 'complete locus/ or in a single point. We now consider that 
species of 'complete loci' which can be the points common to the surfaces 
of a pair of ovals externally connected. We exclude the case of one-point 
contact. The species seems to have what the [468] Greeks meant by their 
term 'even* (taoq). On either side of such a locus, there is the interior of 
one oval and the exterior of another oval, so that the locus is 'even' in 
respect to the contrasted notions of 'concavity' and 'convexity/ It is an 
extra 'assumption'— provable or otherwise according to the particular log- 
ical development of the subject which may have been adopted— that all 
'even' loci are 'flat/ and that all 'flat' loci are 'even/ 

The second question for discussion concerns the physical importance of 
'external connection/ So long as the atomic character of actual entities is 
unrecognized, the application of Zeno's method of argument makes it 
difficult to understand the notion of continuous transmission which reigns 
in physical science. But the concept of 'actual occasions/ adopted in the 
philosophy of organism, allows of the following explanation of physical 
transmission. 

Let two actual occasions be termed 'contiguous' when the regions con- 
stituting their 'standpoints' are externally connected. Then by reason of 
the absence of intermediate actual occasions, the objectification of the 
antecedent occasion in the later occasion is peculiarly complete. There will 
be a set of antecedent, contiguous occasions objectified in any given occa- 
sion; and the abstraction which attends every objectification will merely be 
due to the necessary harmonizations of these objectifications. The ob- 
jectifications of the more distant past will be termed 'mediate'; the con- 
tiguous occasions will have 'immediate' objectification. The mediate ob- 
jectifications will be transmitted through various routes of successive im- 
mediate objectifications. Thus the notion of continuous transmission in 
science must be replaced by the notion of immediate transmission through 
a route of successive quanta of extensiveness. These quanta of extensive- 
ness are the basic regions of successive contiguous occasions. It is not neces- 
sary for the philosophy of organism entirely to deny that there [469] is 
direct objectification of one occasion in a later occasion which is not 
contiguous to it. Indeed, the contrary opinion would seem the more nat- 



308 The Theory of Extension 

ural for this doctrine. Provided that physical science maintains its denial 
of 'action at a distance/ the safer guess is that direct objectification is 
practically negligible except for contiguous occasions; but that this prac- 
tical negligibility is a characteristic of the present cosmic epoch, without 
any metaphysical generality. Also a further distinction should be intro- 
duced. Physical prehensions fall into two species, pure physical prehen- 
sions and hybrid physical prehensions. A pure physical prehension is a 
prehension whose datum is an antecedent occasion objectified in respect to 
one of its own physical prehensions. A hybrid prehension has as its datum 
an antecedent occasion objectified in respect to a conceptual prehension. 
Thus a pure physical prehension is the transmission of physical feeling, 
while hybrid prehension is the transmission of mental feeling. 

There is no reason to assimilate the conditions for hybrid prehensions to 
those for pure physical prehensions. Indeed the contrary hypothesis is the 
more natural. For the conceptual pole does not share in the coordinate 
divisibility of the physical pole, and the extensive continuum is derived 
from this coordinate divisibility. Thus the doctrine of immediate objecti- 
fication for the mental poles and of mediate objectification for the physi- 
cal poles seems most consonant to the philosophy of organism in its ap- 
plication to the present cosmic epoch. This conclusion has some empirical 
support, both from the evidence for peculiar instances of telepathy, and 
from the instinctive apprehension of a tone of feeling in ordinary social 
intercourse. 

But of course such immediate objectification is also reinforced, or weak- 
ened, by routes of mediate objectification. Also pure and hybrid prehen- 
sions are integrated and thus hopelessly intermixed. Hence it will only be 
in exceptional circumstances that an immediate hybrid {470} prehension 
has sufficient vivid definition to receive a subjective form of clear con- 
scious attention. 

SECTION V 

We have now traced the main characteristics of that real potentiality 
from which the first phase of a physical occasion takes its rise. These 
characteristics remain inwoven in the constitution of the subject through- 
out its adventure of self-formation. The actual entity is the product of the 
interplay of physical pole with mental pole. In this way, potentiality passes 
into actuality, and extensive relations mould qualitative content and ob- 
jectifications of other particulars into a coherent finite experience. 

In general, consciousness is negligible; and even the approach to it in 
vivid propositional feelings has failed to attain importance. Blind physical 
purposes reign. It is now obvious that blind prehensions, physical and 
mental, are the ultimate bricks of the physical universe. They are bound 
together within each actuality by the subjective unity of aim which governs 
their allied genesis and their final concrescence. They are also bound to- 



Flat Loci 309 

gether beyond the limits of their peculiar subjects by the way in which the 
prehension in one subject becomes f the objective datum for the prehen- 
sion in a later subject, thus objectifying the earlier subject for the later 
subject. The two types of interconnection of prehensions are themselves 
bound together in one common scheme, the relationship of extension. 

It is by means of 'extension' that the bonds between prehensions take 
on the dual aspect of internal relations, which are yet in a sense external 
relations. It is evident that if the solidarity of the physical world is to be 
relevant to the description of its individual actualities, it can only be by 
reason of the fundamental internality of the relationships in question. On 
the other hand, if the individual discreteness of the actualities is to have 
its weight, there must be an aspect in these relationships [471] from which 
they can be conceived as external, that is, as bonds between divided things. 
The extensive scheme serves this double purpose. 

The Cartesian subjectivism in its application to physical science became 
Newton's assumption of individually existent physical bodies, with merely 
external relationships. We diverge from Descartes by holding that what he 
has described as primary attributes of physical bodies t are really the forms 
of internal relationships between actual occasions, and within actual occa- 
sions. Such a change of thought is the shift from materialism to organism, 
as the basic idea of physical science. 

In the language of physical science, the change from materialism to 
'organic realism'— as the new outlook may be termed—is the displacement 
of the notion of static stuff by the notion of fluent energy. Such energy 
has its structure of action and flow, and is inconceivable apart from such 
structure. It is also conditioned by 'quantum' requirements. These are the 
reflections into physical science of the individual prehensions, and of the 
individual actual entities to which these prehensions belong. Mathematical 
physics translates the saying of Heraclitus, 'AH things flow,' into its own 
language. It then becomes, All things are vectors. Mathematical physics 
also accepts the atomistic doctrine of Democritus. It translates it into the 
phrase, All flow of energy obeys 'quantum' conditions. 

But what has vanished from the field of ultimate scientific conceptions 
is the notion of vacuous material existence with passive endurance, with 
primary individual attributes, and with accidental adventures. Some fea- 
tures of the physical world can be expressed in that way. But the concept 
is useless as an ultimate notion in science, and in cosmology. 



CHAPTER IV 
STRAINS 

SECTION I 

[472] There is nothing in the real world which is merely an inert fact. 
Every reality is there for feeling: it promotes feeling; and it is felt. Also 
there is nothing which belongs merely to the privacy of feeling of one 
individual actuality. All origination is private. But what has been thus 
originated, publicly pervades the world. Thus the geometrical facts con- 
cerning straight and flat loci are public facts characterizing the feelings of 
actual entities. It so happens that in this epoch of the universe the feelings 
involving them are of dominating importance. A feeling in which the 
forms exemplified in the datum concern geometrical, straight, and flat 
loci will be called a 'strain/ In a strain qualitative elements, other than the 
geometrical forms, express themselves as qualities implicated in those 
forms; also the forms are the forms ingredient in particular nexus forming 
the objective data of the physical feelings in question. It is to be remem- 
bered that two points determine a complete straight line, that three non- 
collinear points determine a complete plane, and that four non-coplanar 
points determine a complete three-dimensional flat locus. 

Thus a strain has a complex distribution of geometrical significance. 
There is the geometrical 'seat' which is composed of a limited set of loci 
which are certain sets of points. These points belong to the volume de- 
fining the standpoint of the experient subject. A strain is a complex in- 
tegration of simpler feelings; and it includes in its complex character sim- 
pler feelings in which the qualities concerned are more particularly asso- 
ciated with [473] this seat. But the geometrical interest which dominates 
the growth of a strain lifts into importance the complete lines, planes, and 
three-dimensional flats, which are defined by the seat of the strain. In the 
process of integration, these wider geometrical elements acquire implica- 
tion with the qualities originated in the simpler stages. The process is an 
example of the Category of Transmutation; and is to be explained by the 
intervention of intermediate conceptual feelings. Thus extensive regions, 
which are penetrated by the geometrical elements concerned, acquire ob- 
jectification by means of the qualities and geometrical relations derived 
from the simpler feelings. This type of objectification is characterized by 
the close association of qualities and definite geometrical relations. It is the 
basis of the so-called 'projection' of sensa. This projection of sensa in a 
strain takes many forms according to the differences among various strains. 



Strains 311 

Sometimes the 'seat' retains its individual importance; sometimes in the 
final synthesis it has been almost eliminated from the final synthesis of 
feelings into the one strain. Sometimes the whole extensive region indi- 
cated by the wider geometrical elements is only vaguely geometricized. In 
this case, there is feeble geometrical indication: the strain then takes the 
vague form of feeling certain qualities which are vaguely external. Some- 
times the extensive region is geometricized without any corresponding 
elimination of importance from the seat. In this case,f there is a dual 
reference, to the seat here, and to some objectified region there. The here 
is usually some portion of an animal body; whereas the geometricized 
region may be within, or without, the animal body concerned. 

It is obvious that important feelings of strain involve complex processes 
of concrescence. They are accordingly only to be found in comparatively 
high-grade actual entities. They do not in any respect necessarily involve 
consciousness, or even that approach to consciousness which we associate 
with life. But we shall find that the [474] behaviour of enduring physical 
objects is only explicable by reference to the peculiarities of their strains. 
On the other hand, the occurrences in empty space require less emphasis 
on any peculiar ordering of strains. But the growth of ordered physical 
complexity is dependent on the growth of ordered relationships among 
strains. Fundamental equations in mathematical physics, such as Maxwell's 
electromagnetic equations, are expressions of the ordering of strains 
throughout the physical universe. 



SECTION II 

Presentational immediacy is our perception of the contemporary world 
by means of the senses. It is a physical feeling. But it is a physical feeling 
of a complex type to the formation of which conceptual feelings, more 
primitive physical feelings, and transmutation have played their parts amid 
processes of integration. Its objective datum is a nexus of contemporary 
events, under the definite illustration of certain qualities and relations: 
these qualities and relations are prehended with the subjective form de- 
rived from the primitive physical feelings, thus becoming our 'private' sen- 
sations. Finally, as in the case of all physical feelings, this complex deriva- 
tive physical feeling acquires integration with the valuation inherent in its 
conceptual realization! as a type of experience. 

Naive common sense insists, first, on the 'subject* entertaining this 
feeling; and, secondly, on the analytic components in the order: (i) region 
in contemporary world as datum, (ii) sensations as derivative from, and 
illustrative of, this datum, (Hi) integral feeling involving these elements, 
(iv) appreciative subjective form, (v) interpretative subjective form, (vi) 
purposive subjective form. But this analysis of presentational immediacy 
has not exhausted the content of the feeling. For we feel with the body. 



312 The Theory of Extension 

There may be some further specialization into a particular organ of sen- 
sation; but in any case the 'withness' of the body is an ever-present, [475] 
though elusive, element in our perceptions of presentational immediacy. 
This 'withness' is the trace of the origination of the feeling concerned, 
enshrined by that feeling in its subjective form and in its objective datum. 
But in itself this 'withness of the body ? can be isolated as a component 
feeling in the final 'satisfaction/ From this point of view, the body, or its 
organ of sensation, becomes the objective datum of a component feeling; 
and this feeling has its own subjective form. Also this feeling is physical, 
so that we must look for an eternal object, to be a determinant of the 
definiteness of the body, as objective datum. This component feeling will 
be called the feeling of bodily efficacy. It is more primitive than the feel- 
ing of presentational immediacy which issues from it. Both in common 
sense and in physiological theory, this bodily efficacy is a component pre- 
supposed by the presentational immediacy and leading up to it. Thus, in 
the immediate subject, the presentational immediacy is to be conceived as 
originated in a late phase, by the synthesis of the feeling of bodily efficacy 
with other feelings. We have now to consider the nature of the other 
feelings, and the complex eternal object concerned in the feeling of bodily 
efficacy. 

In the first place, this eternal object must be partially identified with the 
eternal object in the final feeling of presentational immediacy. The whole 
point of the connection between the two feelings is that the presentational 
immediacy is derivative from the bodily efficacy. The present perception is 
strictly inherited from the antecedent bodily functioning, unless all phys- 
iological teaching is to be abandoned. Both eternal objects are highly com- 
plex; and the complex elements of the second eternal object must at least 
be involved in the complex elements of the former eternal object. 

This complex eternal object is analysable into a sense-datum and a geo- 
metrical pattern. In physics, the geometrical pattern appears as a state of 
strain of that actual occasion in the body which is the subject of the \476) 
feeling. But this feeling of bodily efficacy in the final percipient is the re- 
enaction of an antecedent feeling by an antecedent actual entity in the 
body. Thus in this antecedent entity there is a feeling concerned with the 
same sense-datum and a highly analogous state of strain. The feeling must 
be a 'strain* in the sense defined in the previous section. Now this strain 
involves a geometricized region, which in this case also involves a 'focal' 
region as part of itself. This 'focal' region is a region of dense concurrence 
of straight lines defined by the 'seat/ It is the region onto which there is 
so-called 'projection/ 

These lines enter into feeling through a process of integration of yet 
simpler feelings which primarily concern the 'seat' of the pattern. These 
lines have a twofold function as determinants of the feeling. They de- 
fine the 'strain* of the feeler, and they define the focal region which they 
thus relate to the feeler. In so far as we are merely considering an abstract 



Strains 313 

pattern, we are dealing with an abstract eternal object. But as a deter- 
minant of a concrete feeling in a concrete percipient we are dealing with 
the feeling as relating its subject (which includes the 'seat' in its volume) 
to a definite spatial region (the focal region) external to itself. This defi- 
nite contemporary focal region is a nexus which is part of the objective 
datum. Thus the feeling of bodily efficacy is the feeling of the sense-da- 
tum as generally implicated in the whole region (of antecedent 'seats' and 
focal regions) geometrically defined by the inherited strains. This pat- 
terned region is peculiarly dominated by the final 'seat' in the body of the 
feeler, and by the final 'focal' region. Thus the sense-datum has a general 
spatial relation, in which two spatial regions are dominant. Feelings of 
this sort are inherited by man}' strands from the antecedent bodily nerves. 
But in considering one definite feeling of presentational immediacy, these 
many strands of transmission of bodily efficacy, in their final deliverance to 
the ultimate percipient, converge upon the same focal region as picked out 
by the many bodily 'strains/ 

\477] In the integration of these feelings a double act of transmutation 
is achieved. In each of the successive feelings transmitted along the suc- 
cessive actual entities of a bodily nervous strand there are two regions 
mainly concerned; and there is a relation between them constituted by 
intermediate regions picked out by the linkage of the pattern. One region 
is the focal region already discussed, the other region is the seat in the 
immediate subject, constituting its geometrical standpoint. The 'strain' of 
the final actual entity defines the 'seat' and the 'focal region' and the in- 
termediarv regions, and more vaguely the whole of a 'presented' space. 
This final feeling of bodily strain— in the sense of 'strain' defined in the 
previous section— is the last of a route of analogous feelings inherited one 
from the other along the series of bodily occasions along some nerve, or 
other path in the body. There will be parallel routes of such analogous 
feelings, which finally converge with concurrent reinforcement upon the 
single occasion, or route of occasions, which is the ultimate percipient. 

Each of these bodily strain-feelings defines its own seat and its own 
focal region and intermediaries. The sense-datum is vaguely associated 
with the external world as thus felt and defined. But as such feelings are 
'transmuted,' either gradually, or at critical nodes in the body, there is an 
increasing development of special emphasis. Now emphasis is valuation, 
and can only be changed by renewed valuation. But valuation arises in 
conceptual feelings. The conceptual counterpart of these physical feelings 
can be analysed into many conceptual feelings, associating the sense-datum 
with various regions defined by the strain. This conceptual feeling, by its 
reference to definite regions, belongs to the secondary type termed 'propo- 
sitional feelings.' One subordinate propositionai feeling associates the 
sense-datum with the 'seat' of the feeler, another with the 'focal' region of 
the feeler, another with the intermediary region of the feeler, another with 
the seats of the antecedent elements of the [478] nervous strand, and so 



314 The Theory of Extension 

on. The total association of the sense-datum with space-time is analysable 
into a bewildering variety of associations with definite regions, contem- 
porary and antecedent. In general, and apart from high-grade organisms, 
this spatio-temporal association of the sense-datum is integrated into a 
vague sense of externality. The component valuations have in such cases 
failed to differentiate themselves into grades of intensity. But in high- 
gradet cases, in which presentational immediacy is prominent, one of 
three cases happens. Either (i) the association of the sense-datum with 
the seats of some antecedent sets of feelers is exclusively emphasized, or 
(ii) the association of the sense-datum with the focal region of the final 
percipient is exclusively emphasized, or (iii) the association of the sense- 
datum both with the seats of antecedent feelers and with the focal region 
of the immediate feeler is emphasized. 

But these regions are not apprehended in abstraction from the general 
spatio-temporal continuum. The prehension of a region is always the pre- 
hension of systematic elements in the extensive relationship between the 
seat of the immediate feeler and the region concerned. When these valua- 
tions have been effected, the Category of Transmutation provides for the 
transmission to the succeeding subject of a feeling of these regions quali- 
fied by (i.e., contrasted with) that sense-datum. In the first case, there are 
purely bodily sensations; in the second case, there are 'projected' sensations, 
involving regions of contemporary space beyond the body; in the third 
case, there are both bodily feelings and sensations externally projected. 
Thus in the case of all sensory feeling, there is initial privacy of concep- 
tual emphasis passing into publicity of physical feeling. 

Thus, by the agency of the Category of Transmutation, there are two 
types of feelings, for which the objective datum is a nexus with undiscrim- 
inated actual entities. The feelings of the first type are feelings of 'causal 
efficacy'; and those of the second type are those of 'presenta- [479] tional 
immediacy/ In the first type, the analogous elements in the various feelings 
of the various actualities of the bodily nexus are transmuted into a feeling 
ascribed to the bodily nexus as one entity. In the second type, the trans- 
mutation is more elaborate and shifts the nexus concerned from the ante- 
cedent bodily nexus (i.e., the 'seat') to the contemporary focal nexus. 

Both these types of feeling are the outcome of a complex process of 
massive simplification which is characteristic of higher grades of actual 
entities. They apparently have but slight importance in the constitutions 
of actual occasions in empty space; but they have dominating importance 
in the physical feelings belonging to the life-historyt of enduring organisms 
—the inorganic and organic, alike. 

In respect to the sensa concerned, there is a gradual transformation of 
their functions as they pass from occasion to occasion along a route of in- 
heritance up to some final high-grade experient. In their most primitive 
form of functioning, a sensum is felt physically with emotional enjoyment 



Strains 315 

of its sheer individual essence. For example, red is felt with emotional en- 
joyment of its sheer redness. In this primitive prehension we have aborig- 
inal physical feeling in which the subject feels itself as enjoying redness. 
This is Hume's 'impression of sensation' stripped of all spatial relations 
with other such impressions. In so far as they spring up in this primitive, 
aboriginal way, they— in Hume's words— "arise in the soul from unknown 
causes." But in fact we can never isolate such ultimate irrationalities. In 
our experience, as in distinct analysis, physical feelings are always derived 
from some antecedent experient. Occasion B prehends occasion A as an 
antecedent subject experiencing a sensum with emotional intensity. Also 
B's subjective form of emotion is conformed to A's subjective form. Thus 
there is a vector transmission of emotional feeling of a sensum from A to 
B. In this way B feels the sensum as derived from A and feels it with an 
emotional form [480] also derived from A. This is the most primitive form 
of the feeling of causal efficacy. In physics it is the transmission of a form 
of energy. In the bodily transmission from occasion to occasion of a high- 
grade animal body, there is a gradual modification of these functions of 
sensa. In their most primitive functioning for the initial occasions within 
the animal body, they are qualifications of emotion— types of energy, in 
the language of physics;f in their final functioning for the high-grade 
experient occasion at the end of the route, they are qualities 'inherent' in 
a presented, contemporary nexus. In the final percipient any conscious 
feeling of the primitive emotional functioning of the sensum is often en- 
tirely absent. But this is not always the case; for example, the perception 
of a red cloak may often be associated with a feeling of red irritation. 

To return to Hume's doctrine (cf. Treatise, Part III, Sect. V) of the 
origination of 'impressions of sensation' from unknown causes, it is 
first necessary to distinguish logical priority from physical priority. Un- 
doubtedly an impression of sensation is logically the simplest of physical 
prehensions. It is the percipient occasion feeling the sensum as participat- 
ing in its own concrescence. This is the enjoyment of a private sensation. 

There is a logical simplicity about such a sensation which makes it the 
primitive, aboriginal type of physical feeling. But there are two objections 
to Hume's doctrine which assigns to them a physical priority. First, there 
is the empirical objection. Hume's theory of a complex of such impres- 
sions elaborated into a supposition of a common physical world is entirely 
contrary to naive experience. We find ourselves in the double role of agents 
and patients in a common world, and the conscious recognition of impres- 
sions of sensation is the work of sophisticated elaboration. This is also 
Locke's doctrine in the third and fourth books of his Essay. The child 
first dimly elucidates the complex externality of particu- [481] lar things 
exhibiting a welter of forms of definiteness, and then disentangles his im- 
pressions of these forms in isolation. A young man does not initiate his 
experience by dancing with impressions of sensation, and then proceed 



316 The Theory of Extension 

to conjecture a partner. His experience takes the converse route. The un- 
empirica! character of the philosophical school derived from Hume can- 
not be too often insisted upon. The true empirical doctrine is that physi- 
cal feelings are in their origin vectors, and that the genetic process of con- 
crescence introduces the elements which emphasize privacy. 

Secondly, Hume's doctrine is necessarily irrational. For if the impres- 
sions of sensation arise from unknown causes (cf. Hume, loc. cit.) a stop 
is put to the rationalistic search for a rational cosmology. Such a cos- 
mology requires that metaphysics shall provide a doctrine of relevance 
between a form and any occasion in which it participates. If there be no 
such doctrine, all hope of approximating to a rational view of the world 
vanishes. 

Hume's doctrine has no recommendation except the pleasure which it 
gives to its adherents. 

The philosophy of organism provides for this relevance by means of 
two doctrines, (i) the doctrine of God embodying a basic completeness 
of appetition, and (ii) the doctrine of each occasion effecting a concres- 
cence of the universe, including God. Then, by the Category of Conceptual 
Reproduction, the vector prehensions of God's appetition, and of other 
occasions, issue in the mental pole of conceptual prehensions; and by 
integration of this pole with the pure physical prehensions there arise the 
primitive physical feelings of sensa, with their subjective forms, t emotional 
and purposive. These feelings, with their primitive simplicity, arise into 
distinctness by reason of the elimination effected by this integration of the 
vector prehensions with the conceptual appetitions. Such primitive feel- 
ings cannot be separated from their subjective forms. The subject never 
loses its triple character of recipient, patient, and agent. These primitive 
feel- [482] ings have already been considered under the name of 'physical 
purposes' (cf. Part III, Ch. V). They correspond to Hume's 'impressions 
of sensation/ But they do not originate the process of experience. 

We see that a feeling of presentational immediacy comes into being 
by reason of an integration of a conceptual feeling drawn from bodily effi- 
cacy with a bare regional feeling which is also a component in a complex 
feeling of bodily efficacy. Also this bare regional feeling is reinforced with 
the general regional feeling which is the whole of our direct physical feel- 
ing of the contemporary world: and the conceptual feeling is reinforced 
by the generation of physical purpose. This integration takes the form of 
the creative imputation of the complex eternal object, ingredient in the 
bodily efficacy, onto some contemporary focal region felt in the strain- 
feeling. Also the subjective form is transmitted from the conceptual valu- 
ation and the derivate physical purpose.' But this subjective form is that 
suitable to the bodily efficacy out of which it has arisen. Thus the mere 
region with its imputed eternal object is felt as though there had been a 
feeling of its efficacy. But there is no mutual efficacy of contemporary 



Strains 317 

regions. This transference of subjective form is termed 'symbolic trans- 
ference/ * 

An additional conceptual feeling, with its valuation, arises from this 
physical feeling of presentational immediacy. It is the conceptual feeling 
of a region thus characterized. This is the aesthetic valuation proper to 
the bare objective datum of the presentational immediacy. But this valua- 
tion is less primitive than that gained from the conceptual prehension 
by symbolic transference. The primitive subjective form includes a valua- 
tion as though the contemporary region, by its own proper constitution, 
were causally effective on the percipient sub- [483] ject. The secondary 
valuation is the aesthetic appreciation of the bare fact: this bare fact is 
merely that region, thus qualified. Thus the contemporary world, as felt 
through the senses, is valued for its own sake, by means of a later concep- 
tual feeling; but it is also valued for its derivation from antecedent effi- 
cacy, by means of transmutation from earlier conceptual feeling com- 
bined with derivate 'physical purpose/ 

But none of these operations can be segregated from nature into the 
subjective privacy of a mind. Mental and physical operations are incurably 
intertwined; and both issue into publicity, and are derived from publicity. 
The vector character of prehension is fundamental. 

SECTION III 

It is the mark of a high-grade organism to eliminate, by negative pre- 
hension, the irrelevant accidents in its environment, and to elicit massive 
attention to every variety of systematic order. For this purpose, the Cate- 
gory of Transmutation is the master-principle. By its operation each nexus 
can be prehended in terms of the analogies among its own members, or 
in terms of analogies among the members of other nexus but yet relevant 
to it. In this way the organism in question suppresses the mere multi- 
plicities of things, and designs its own contrasts. The canons of art are 
merely the expression, in specialized forms, of the requisites for depth of 
experience. The principles of morality are allied to the canons of art, in 
that they also express, in another connection, the same requisites. Owing 
to the principle that contemporary actual entities occur in relative inde- 
pendence, the nexus of contemporary actual entities are peculiarly favour- 
able for this transference of systematic qualities from other nexus to them- 
selves. For a difficulty arises in the operation of the Category of Transmuta- 
tion, when a characteristic prevalent among the individual entities of one 
nexus is to be transferred to another nexus treated as a unity. The diffi- 
culty is that the individual actuali- \484] ties of the recipient nexus are also 

1 Cf. my three Barbour-Page lectures, Symbolism, at the University of Virginia 
(New York: Macmillan, 1927, and Cambridge University Press, 1928) ;t and 
also above, Part II, Ch. VIII. 



318 The Theory of Extension 

respectively objectified in the percipient subject by systematic character- 
istics which equally demand the transference to their own nexus; but this 
is the nexus which should be the recipient of the other transference. Thus 
there are competing qualities struggling to effect the objectification of the 
same nexus. The result is attenuation and elimination. 

When the recipient nexus is composed of entities contemporary with 
the percipient subject, this difficulty vanishes. For the contemporary en- 
tities do not enter into the constitution of the percipient subject by ob- 
jectification through any of their own feelings. Thus their only direct con- 
nection with the subject is their implication in the same extensive scheme. 
Thus a nexus of actual entities, contemporary with the percipient subject, 
puts up no alternative characteristics to inhibit the transference to it of 
characteristics from antecedent nexus. 

A high-grade percipient is necessarily an occasion in the historic route 
of an enduring object. If this route is to propagate itself successfully into 
the future, it is above all things necessary that its decisions in the imme- 
diate occasion should have the closest relevance to the concurrent hap- 
penings among contemporary occasions. For these contemporary entities 
will, in the near future, form the 'immediate past' for the future embodi- 
ment of the enduring object. This 'immediate past' is of overwhelming in- 
fluence; for all routes of transmission from the more remote past must 
pass through it. Thus the contemporary occasions tell nothing; and yet 
are of supreme importance for the survival of the enduring object. 

This gap in the experience of the percipient subject is bridged by presen- 
tational immediacy. This type of experience is the lesson of the past re- 
flected into the present. The more important contemporary occasions 
are those in the near neighborhood. Their actual worlds \485] are prac- 
tically identical with that of the percipient subject. The percipient pre- 
bends the nexus of contemporary occasions by the mediation of eternal 
objects which it inherits from its own past. Also it selects the contemporary 
nexus thus prehended by the efficacy of strains whose focal regions are 
important elements in the past of those nexus. Thus, for successful orga- 
nisms, presentational immediacy— though it yields no direct experience 
about the contemporary world, and though in unfortunate instances the 
experience which it does yield may be irrelevant— does yield experience 
which expresses how the contemporary world has in fact emerged from 
its own past. 

Presentational immediacy works on the principle that it is better to ob- 
tain information about the contemporary world, even if occasionally it be 
misleading. 

SECTION IV 

Depth of experience is gained by concentrating emphasis on the sys- 
tematic structural systems in the environment, and discarding individual 
variations. Every element of systematic structure is emphasized, every in- 



Strains 319 

dividual aberration is pushed into the background. The variety sought is 
the variety of structures, and never the variety of individuals. For example, t 
we neglect empty space in comparison with the structural systematic 
nexus which is the historic route of an enduring object. In every possible 
way, the more advanced organisms simplify their experience so as to em- 
phasize those nexus with some element of tightness of systematic structure. 

In pursuance of this principle, the regions, geometricized by the various 
strains in such an organism, not only lie in the contemporary world, t but 
they coalesce so as to emphasize one unified locus in the contemporary 
world. This selected locus is penetrated by the straight lines, the planes, 
and the three-dimensional flat loci associated with the strains. This is the 
'strain-locus' belonging to an occasion in the history of an enduring object. 
\486] This occasion is the immediate percipient subject under considera- 
tion. Each such occasion has its one strain-locus which serves for all its 
strains. The focal regions of the various strains all lie within this strain- 
locus, and are in general distinct. But the strain-locus as a whole is com- 
mon to all the strains. Each occasion lies in its own strain-locus. 

The meaning of the term 'rest' is the relation of an occasion to its 
strain-locus, if there be one. An occasion with no unified strain-locus has 
no dominating locus with which it can have the relationship of 'rest/ An 
occasion 'rests' in its strain-locus. This is why it is nonsense to ask of an 
occasion in empty space whether it be 'at rest' in reference to some locus. 
For, since such occasions have no strain-loci ? the relationship of 'rest' does 
not apply to them. The strain-locus is the locus which is thoroughly geo- 
metricized by the strain-feelings of the percipient occasion. It must have 
the property of being continent of straight lines, and of flat loci of all 
dimensions. Thus its boundaries will be three-dimensional t flat loci, non- 
intersecting. A strain-locus approximates to a three-dimensional flat locus; 
but in fact it is four-dimensional, with a time-thickness. 

SECTION V 

Reviewing the discussion in the preceding sections of this chapter and 
of Chapter IV of Part II, we note that, in reference to any one actual 
occasion M, seven (but cf. Section VHIt) distinct considerations define 
loci composed of other actual occasions. In the first place, there are three 
loci defined by causal efficacy, namelv, the 'causal past' of M, the 'causal 
future' of M, and the 'contemporaries' of M. An actual occasion P, be- 
longing to M's causal past, is objectified for M by a perspective represen- 
tation of its own (i.e., P's) qualities of feeling and intensities of feeling. 
There is a quantitative and qualitative vector flow of feeling from P to M; 
and in this way, what P is subjectively, belongs to M objectively. An [487] 
actual occasion Q, belonging to M's causal future, is in the converse rela- 
tion to M, compared to P's relation. For the causal future is composed of 
those actual occasions which will have M in their respective causal pasts. t 



320 The Theory of Extension 

Actual occasions R and S,t which are contemporary with M, are those 
actual occasions which lie neither in M's causal past, nor in M's causal 
future. The peculiarity of the locus of contemporaries of M is that any two 
of its members, such as R and S, need not be contemporaries of each other. 
They may be mutually contemporaries, but not necessarily. It is evident 
from the form of the definition of 'contemporary/ that if R be contem- 
porary with M, then M is contemporary with R. This peculiarity of the 
locus of JVTs contemporaries— that R and S may be both contemporaries 
of M, but not contemporaries of each other— points to another set of loci. 
A 'duration' is a locus of actual occasions, such that (a) any two members 
of the locus are contemporaries, and (/?) that any actual occasion, not 
belonging to the duration, is in the causal past or causal future of some 
members of the duration. 

A duration is a complete locus of actual occasions in 'unison of becom- 
ing/ or in 'concrescent unison. 7 It is the old-fashioned 'present state of 
the world/ In reference to a given duration, D, the actual world is divided 
into three mutually exclusive loci. One of these loci is the duration D it- 
self. Another of these loci is composed of actual occasions which lie in the 
past of some members of D: this locus is the 'past of the duration D/ The 
remaining locus is composed of actual occasions which lie in the future of 
some members of D: this locus is the 'future of the duration D/ 

By its definition, a duration which contains an occasion Mf must lie 
within the locus of the contemporaries of M. According to the classical 
pre-relativistic notions of time, there would be only one duration including 
M, and it would contain all M's contemporaries. According to modern 
relativistic views, t we must admit that there are many durations including 
M— in fact, an infinite [488] number, so that no one of them contains all 
M's contemporaries. 

Thus the past of a duration D includes the whole past of any actual 
occasion belonging to D, such as M for example, and it also includes some 
of ivis contemporaries. Also the future of the duration D includes the 
whole future of M, and also includes some of M's contemporaries. 

So far, starting from an actual occasion M, we find six loci, or types of 
loci, defined purely in terms of notions derived from 'causal efficacy/ These 
loci are, M's causal past, M's causal future, M's contemporaries, the set 
of durations defined by M; and finally, taking any one such duration which 
we call D as typical, there is D's past, and D's future. Thus there are the 
three definite loci, the causal past, the causal future,* and the contem- 
poraries, which are defined uniquely by M; and there are the set of dura- 
tions defined by M, and the set of 'durational pasts' and the set of 'dura- 
tional futures/ The paradox which has been introduced by the modern 
theory of relativity is twofold. First, the actual occasion M does not, as a 
general characteristic of all actual occasions, define a unique duration; 
and secondly,! such a unique duration, if defined, does not include all the 
contemporaries of M. 



Strains 321 

But among the set of durations, there may be one with a unique asso- 
ciation with M. For the mode of presentational immediacy objectifies for 
Mf the actual occasions within one particular duration. This is the 'pre- 
sented duration/ Such a presented duration is an inherent factor in the 
character of an 'enduring physical object.' It is practically identical with 
the strain-locus. This locus is the reason why there is a certain absoluteness 
in the notions of rest, velocity, and acceleration. For this presented dura- 
tion is the spatialized world in which the physical object is at rest, at least 
momentarily for its occasion M. This spatialized world is objectified for M 
by M's own conditioned range of feeling-tones which have been inherited 
from the causal past of the actual occasion [489] in question, namely, of 
M. Thus the presented duration is with peculiar vividness part of the 
character of the actual occasion, A historic route of actual occasions,! 
each with its presented duration, constitutes a physical object. 

Our partial consciousness of the objectifications of the presented dura- 
tion constitutes our knowledge of the present world, so far as it is derived 
from the senses. Remembering that objectifications constitute the objec- 
tive conditions from which an actual occasion (M) initiates its successive 
phases of feeling, we must admit that, in the most general sense, the ob- 
jectifications express the causality by which the external world fashions 
the actual occasion in question. Thus the objectifications of the presented 
duration represent a recovery by its contemporaries of a very real efficacy 
in the determination of M. It is true that the eternal objects which effect 
this objectification belong to the feeling-tones which M derives from the 
past. But it is a past which is largely common to M and to the presented 
duration. Thus by the intermediacy of the past, the presented duration has 
its efficacy in the production of M. This efficacy does not derogate from 
the principle of the independence of contemporary occasions. For the con- 
temporary occasions in the presented duration are only efficacious through 
the feeling-tones of their sources, and not through their own immediate 
feeling-tones. 

Thus in so far as Bergson ascribes the 'spatialization' of the world to a 
distortion introduced by the intellect, he is in error. This spatialization is 
a real factor in the physical constitution of every actual occasion belong- 
ing to the life-history f of an enduring physical object. For actual occasions 
in so-called 'empty space/ there is no reason to believe that any duration 
has been singled out for spatialization; that is to say, that physical per- 
ception in the mode of presentational immediacy is negligible for such 
occasions. The reality of the rest and the motion of enduring physical 
objects depends on this spatializa- [490] tion for occasions in their historic 
routes. The presented duration is the duration in respect to which the 
enduring object is momentarily at rest. It is that duration which is the 
strain-locus of that occasion in the life-history of the enduring object. 



CHAPTER V 
MEASUREMENT 

SECTION I 

[491] The identification of the strain-locus with a duration is only an 
approximation based upon empirical evidence. Their definitions are en- 
tirely different. A duration is a complete set of actual occasions, such that 
all the members are mutually contemporary one with the other. This 
property is expressed by the statement that the members enjoy 'unison of 
immediacy/ The completeness consists in the fact that no other actual 
occasion can be added to the set without loss of this unison of immediacy. 
Every occasion outside the set is in the past or in the future of some 
members of the set, and is contemporary with other members of the set. 
According as an occasion is in the past, or the future, of some members 
of a duration, the occasion is said to be in the past, or in the future, of 
that duration. 

No occasion can be both in the past and in the future! of a duration. 
Thus a duration forms a barrier in the world between its past and its fu- 
ture. Any route of occasions, in which adjacent members are contiguous, 
and such that it includes members of the past, and members of the future, 
of a duration, must also include one or more members of that duration. 
This is the notion of a duration, which has already been explained (cf. 
Part II, Ch. IV ? Sects. VIII and IX). 

The definition of a strain-locus (cf. previous chapter) depends entirely 
on the geometrical elements which arc the elements of geometric form in 
the objectification of a nexus including the experient occasion in question. 
These [492] elements are (i) a set of points, within the volume of the 
regional standpoint of the experient occasion, and (ii) the set of straight 
lines defined by all the pairs of these points. The set of points is the 'seat 
of the strain; the set of straight lines is the set of projectors/ The com- 
plete region penetrated by the 'projectors' is the strain-locus. A strain- 
locus is bounded by two 'flat' three-dimensional surfaces. When some 
members of the seat have a special function in the strain-feeling, the pro- 
jectors which join pairs of these points may define a subordinate region 
in the strain-locus; this subordinate region is termed the 'focal region/ 

The strain-loci in the present epoch seem to be confined to the con- 
temporaries of their experient occasions. In fact 'strain-loci 7 occur as essen- 
tial components for perception in the mode of presentational immediacy. 

B22 



Measurement 323 

In this mode of perception there is a unique strain-locus for each such 
experient. Rest and motion are definable by reference to real strain-loci, 
and to potential strain-loci. Thus the molecules, forming material bodies 
for which the science of dynamics is important, may be presumed to have 
unique strain-loci associated with their prehensions. 

This recapitulation of the theories of durations and strain-loci brings 
out the entire disconnection of their definitions. There is no reason, de- 
rivable from these definitions, why there should be any close association 
between the strain-locus of an experient occasion and any duration includ- 
ing that occasion among its members. It is an empirical fact that mankind 
invariably conceives the presented world as consisting of such a duration. 
This is the contemporary world as immediately perceived by the senses. 
But close association does not necessarily involve unqualified identification. 
It is permissible, in framing a cosmology to accord with scientific theory, 
to assume that the associated pair, strain-locus and presented duration, do 
not involve one and the same extensive region. From the point of view of 
conscious per- [493] ception, the divergence may be negligible, though im- 
portant for scientific theory. 

SECTION II 

Thet notions which have led to the phraseology characterizing the 'pro- 
jected' sensa as 'secondary qualities' arise out of a fundamental difference 
between 'strain-loci' and their associated 'presented durations.' A strain- 
locus is entirely determined by the experient in question. It extends be- 
yond that experient indefinitely, although defined by geometrical elements 
entirely within the extensive region which is the standpoint of the ex- 
perient. The 'seat' of the strain-locus, which is a set of points within this 
region, is sufficient to effect this definition of the complete strain-locus by 
the aid of the straight lines termed the 'projectors.' These straight lines 
are nexus whose geometrical relations are forms ingredient in a strain- 
feeling with these nexus as data. Presentational immediacy arises from 
the integration of a strain-feeling and a 'physical purpose,' so that, by the 
Category of Transmutation, the sensum involved in the 'physical purpose' 
is projected onto some external focal region defined by projectors. 

It is to be noted that this doctrine of presentational immediacy and of 
the strain-locus entirely depends upon a definition of straight lines in terms 
of mere extensiveness. If the definition depends upon the actual physical 
occasions beyond the experient, the experient should find the actual phys- 
ical structures of his environment a block, or an assistance, to his 'projec- 
tion' to focal regions beyond them. The projection of sensa in presenta- 
tional immediacy depends entirely upon the state of the brain and upon 
systematic geometrical relations characterizing the brain. How the brain 
is excited, whether by visual stimuli through the eye, or by auditory stimuli 
through the ear, or by the excessive consumption of alcohol, or by hyster- 



324 The Theory of Extension 

ical emotion, is completely indifferent; granted the proper excitement of 
the brain, the experient will per- [494] ceive some definite contemporary 
region illustrated by the projected sensa. The indifference of presentational 
immediacy to contemporary actualities in the environment cannot be ex- 
aggerated. It is only by reason of the fortunate dependence of the experi- 
ent and of these contemporary actualities on a common past, that presen- 
tational immediacy is more than a barren aesthetic display. It does display 
something, namely, the real extensiveness of the contemporary world. It 
involves the contemporary actualities but only objectifies them as condi- 
tioned by extensive relations. It displays a system pervading the world, a 
world including and transcending the experient. It is a vivid display of 
systematic real potentiality, inclusive of the experient and reaching beyond 
it. In so far as straight lines can only be defined in terms of measurements, 
requiring particular actual occasions for their performance, the theory of 
geometry lacks the requisite disengagement from particular physical fact. 
The requisite geometrical forms can then only be introduced after exam- 
ination of the particular actual occasions required for measurement. But 
the theory of 'projection/ explained above, requires that the definition of 
a complete straight line be logically prior to the particular actualities in 
the extensive environment. This requisite has been supplied by the pre- 
ceding theory of straight lines (cf. Ch. Hit). The projectors do depend 
upon the one experient occasion. But even this dependence merely re- 
quires that component feelings of that occasion should participate in 
certain geometric elements, namely, a set of points, and the straight lines 
defined by them, among their data. Thus, according to this explanation, 
presentational immediacy is the mode in which vivid feelings of contem- 
porary geometrical relations, with especial emphasis on certain 'focal' re- 
gions, enter into experience. 

This doctrine is what common sense always assumes. When we see a 
coloured shape, it may be a real man, or a ghost, or an image behind a 
mirror, or a hallucination; [495] but whatever it be, there it is— ex- 
hibiting to us a certain region of external space. If we are gazing at a 
nebula, a thousand light-years away, we are not looking backward through 
a thousand years. Such ways of speaking are interpretative phrases, 
diverting attention from the primary fact of direct experience, observing 
the illumination of a contemporary patch of the heavens. In philosophy, 
it is of the utmost importance to beware of the interpretative vagaries of 
language. Further, the extent of the patch illuminated will depend en- 
tirely upon the magnifying power of the telescope used. The correlation 
of the patch, thus seen through the telescope, with a smaller patch, de- 
fined by direct 'projection' from the observer, is again a question of scien- 
tific interpretation. This smaller patch is what we are said to have seen 
'magnified' by the use of the telescope. What we do see is the bigger patch, 
and we correlate it with the smaller patch by theoretical calculation. The 
scientific explanation neglects the telescope and the larger patch really 



Measurement 325 

seen, and considers them as merely instrumental intermediaries. It con- 
centrates on the contemporary smaller patch, and finally deserts even that 
patch in favour of another region a thousand years in the past. This ex- 
planation is only one illustration of the way in which so-called statements 
of direct observation are, through and through, merely interpretative 
statements of simple direct experience. When we say that we have seen 
a man, we may mean that we have seen a patch which we believe to be a 
man. In this case, our total relevant experience may be more than that 
of bare sight. In Descartes' phraseology, our experience of the external 
world embraces not only an 'inspectio' of the 'realitas objective' in the pre- 
hensions in question, but also a 'judicium' which calls into play the totality 
of our experience beyond those prehensions. The objection to this doctrine 
of 'presentational immediacy'— that it presupposes a definition of straight 
lines, freed from dependence on external actualities— has been removed 
by the production of such a definition in Ch. III.* [496] Of course the 
point of the definition is to demonstrate that the extensive continuum, 
apart from the particular actualities into which it is atomized, includes in 
its systematic structure the relationships of regions expressed by straight 
lines. These relationships are there for perception. 

SECTION III 

The Cartesian doctrine of the 'realitas objective attaching to presenta- 
tional immediacy is entirely denied by the modern doctrine of private 
psychological fields. Locke's doctrine of 'secondary qualities' is a halfway 
house to the modern position, and indeed so is Descartes' own position 
considered as a whole. Descartes' doctrine on this point is obscure, and 
is interpretable as according with that of the philosophy of organism. But 
Locke conceives the sensa as purely mental additions to the facts of physi- 
cal nature. Both philosophers conceive the physical world as in essential 
independence of the mental world, though the two worlds have ill-defined 
accidental relationships. According to the philosophy of organism, physical 
and mental operations are inextricably intertwined; also we find the sensa 
functioning as forms participating in the vector prehensions of one occa- 
sion by another; and finally in tracing the origin of presentational im- 
mediacy, we find mental operations transmuting the functions of sensa 
so as to transfer them from being participants in causal prehensions into 
participants in presentational t prehensions. But throughout the whole 
story, the sensa are participating in nature as much as anything else. It is 
the function of mentality to modify the physical participation of eternal 
objects: the case of presentational prehensions is only one conspicuous 
example. The whole doctrine of mentality— from the case of God down- 
wards—is that it is a modifying agency. But Descartes and Locke aban- 
don the 'realitas objectiva' so far as sensa are concerned (but for Descartes, 
cf. Meditation f,t "it is certain all the same that the colours of [497] which 



326 The Theory of Extension 

this is composed are necessarily real"), and hope to save it so far as ex- 
tensive relations are concerned. This is an impossible compromise. It was 
easily swept aside by Berkeley and Hume. (Cf. Enquiry , Sect. XII, Part I.f 
Hume,t with obvious truth, refers to Berkeley as the originator of this 
train of argument.) The modern doctrine of 'private psychological fields' 
is the logical result of Hume's doctrine, though it is a result which Hume 
'as an agent' refused to accept. This modern doctrine raises a great diffi- 
culty in the interpretation of modern science. For all exact observation is 
made in these private psychological fields. It is then no use talking about 
instruments and laboratories and physical energy. What is really being 
observed are narrow bands of colour-sensa in the private psychological 
space of colour- vis ion. The impressions of sensation which collectively 
form this entirely private experience 'arise in the soul from unknown 
causes/ The spectroscope is a myth, the radiant energy is a myth, the ob- 
server's eye is a myth, the observer's brain is a myth, and the observer's 
record of his experiment on a sheet of paper is a myth. When,f some 
months later, he reads his notes to a learned society, he has a new visual 
experience of black marks on a white background in a new private psycho- 
logical field. And again, these experiences arise in his soul 'from unknown 
causes.' It is merely 'custom' which leads him to connect his earlier with 
his later experiences. 

AH exact measurements are, on this theory, observations in such private 
psychological fields. 

Hume himself 'as an agent' refused to accept this doctrine. The con- 
clusion is that Hume's account of experience is unduly simplified. This is 
the conclusion adopted by the philosophy of organism. 

But one important fact does emerge from the discussion: that all exact 
measurements concern perceptions in the mode of presentational imme- 
diacy; and that such observations purely concern the systematic geometric 
forms of the environment, forms defined by projectors [498] from the 
'seat' of the strain and irrespective of the actualities which constitute the 
environment. The contemporary actualities of the world are irrelevant to 
these observations. AH scientific measurements merely concern the sys- 
tematic real potentiality out of which these actualities arise. This is the 
meaning of the doctrine that physical science is solely concerned with the 
mathematical relations of the world. 

These mathematical relations belong to the systematic order of exten- 
siveness which characterizes the cosmic epoch in which we live. The 
societies of enduring objects— electrons, protons, molecules, material bodies 
—at once sustain that order and arise out of it The mathematical rela- 
tions involved in presentational immediacy thus belong equally to the 
world perceived and to the naturef of the percipient They are, at the 
same time, public fact and private experience. 

The perceptive mode of presentational immediacy is in one sense bar- 
ren. So far as— apart from symbolic transference— it discloses the con- 



Measurement 327 

temporary world, that world, thus objectified, is devoid of all elements 
constitutive of subjective form, elements emotional, appreciative, pur- 
posive. The bonds of the objectified nexus only exhibit the definiteness 
of mathematical relations. 

But in another sense this perceptive mode has overwhelming signifi- 
cance. It exhibits that complex of systematic mathematical relations which 
participate in all the nexus of our cosmic epoch, in the widest meaning of 
that term. These relations only characterize the epoch by reason of their 
foundation in the immediate experience of the society of occasions domi- 
nating that epoch. Thus we find a special application of the doctrine of 
the interaction between societies of occasions and the laws of nature. The 
perceptive mode in presentational immediacy is one of the defining char- 
acteristics of the societies which constitute the nexus termed material 
bodies. Also in some fainter intensity it belongs to the electromagnetic 
occasions in empty space. From the point of view of a [499] single experi- 
ent, that mode discloses systematic relations which dominate the environ- 
ment. But the environment is dominated by these relationships by reason 
of the experiences of the individual occasions constituting the societies. 

It is by reason of this disclosure of ultimate system that an intellectual 
comprehension of the physical universe is possible. There is a systematic 
framework permeating all relevant fact. By reference to this framework the 
variant, various, vagrant, evanescent details of the abundant world can 
have their mutual relations exhibited by their correlation to the common 
terms of a universal system. Sounds differ qualitatively among themselves, 
sounds differ qualitatively from colours, colours differ qualitatively from 
the rhythmic throbs of emotion and of pain; yet all alike are periodic 
and have their spatial relations and their wave-lengths. The discovery of 
the true relevance of the mathematical relations disclosed in presentational 
immediacy was the first step in the intellectual conquest of nature. Accu- 
rate science was then born. Apart from these relations as facts in nature, 
such science is meaningless, a tale told by an idiot and credited by fools. 
For example, the conjecture by an eminent astronomer, based on measure- 
ments of photographic plates, that the period of the revolution of our 
galaxy of stars is about three hundred million years can only derive its 
meaning from the systematic geometrical relations which permeate the 
epoch. But he would have required the same reference to system, if he 
had made an analogous statement about the period of revolution of a 
child's top. Also the two periods are comparable in terms of the system. 

SECTION IV 

Measurement depends upon counting and upon permanence. The ques- 
tion is, what is counted, and what is permanent? The things that are 
counted are the inches on a straight metal rod, a yard-measure. Also the 
thing [500] that is permanent is this yard-measure in respect both to its 



328 The Theory of Extension 

internal relations and in respect to some of its extensive relations to the 
geometry of the world. In the first place, the rod is straight. Thus the 
measurement depends on the straightness and not the straightness upon 
the measurement. The modern answer to this statement is that the 
measurement is a comparison of infinitesimals, or of an approximation to 
infinitesimals. The answer to this answer is that there are no infinitesimals, 
and that therefore there can be no approximation to them. In mathe- 
matics,! all phraseology about infinitesimals is merely disguised statement 
about a class of finites. This doctrine has been conclusive mathematical 
theory since the time of Weierstrass in the middle of the nineteenth 
century. Also all the contortions of curvature are possible for a segment 
between any end-points. 

Of course, in all measurement there is approximation in our supposi- 
tions as to the yard-measure, t But it is approximation to straightness. Also 
having regard to the systematic geometry of straight lines, and to the 
type of approximation exhibited by the rod, the smaller the portion used, 
the more negligible are the percentage errors introduced by the defects 
from straightness. But unless the notion of straightness has a definite 
meaning in reference to the extensive relations, this whole procedure in 
practical measurement is meaningless. There is nothing to distinguish one 
contorted segment between end-points from another contorted segment 
between those end-points. One is no straighter than another. Also any 
percentage differences between their lengths can exist. 

Again, the inches are counted because they are congruent and are end- 
on along the straight rod. No one counts coincident inches. The counting 
essentially is concerned with non-coincident straight segments. The nu- 
merical measure of length is the indication of the fact that the yard- 
measure is a straight rod divisible into thirty-six congruent inch-long 
segments. 

[50 J] There is a modern doctrine that 'congruence' means the possibility 
of coincidence. If this be the case, then the importance of congruence 
would arise when the possibility is realized. Alternatively, the possibility 
could be of importance as a lure entering into the subjective aim. If the 
latter alternative were true, congruence would play its part in the form of 
a tendency of congruent bodies to coalesce, or to resist coalescence. In 
fact, there would be adversion to, or aversion from,t coalescence. Of course 
the suggestion is fantastic. Recurring to the former alternative, the inv 
portance of the thirty-six inches along the yard-measure depends on the 
fact that they are not coincident and, until the destruction of the rod, 
never will be coincident. There is a realized property of the rod that it is 
thirty-six inches in length. Thus although 'coincidence' is used as a test 
of congruence, it is not the meaning of congruence. 

We must now consider the use of 'coincidence' as a test. Congruence is 
tested either by the transference of a steel yard-measure from coincidence 



Measurement 329 

with one body to coincidence with another body, or by some optical means 
dependent on the use of an optical instrument and on the congruence of 
successive wave-lengths t in a train of waves, or by some other vibratory 
device dependent on analogous principles. 

It is at once evident that all these tests aref dependent on a direct in- 
tuition of permanence. This 'permanence' means 'permanence in respect 
to congruence'! for the various instruments employed, namely, the yard- 
measure, or the optical instruments, or analogous instruments. For exam- 
ple, the yard-measure is assumed to remain congruent to its previous self, 
as it is transferred from one setting to another setting. It is not sufficient 
to intuit that it remains the same body. Substances that are very deform- 
able preserve that sort of self-identity. The required property is that of 
self-congruence. Minute variations of physical conditions will make the 
rod vary slightly; also sense-perception is never absolutely exact. [502] But 
unless there be a meaning to 'exactitude/ the notions of a 'slight variation' 
and of a 'slight defect from exactitude' are nonsense. Apart from such a 
meaning the two occasions of the rod's existence are incomparable, except 
by another experiment depending upon the same principles. There can 
only be a finite number of such experiments; so ultimately we are reduced 
to these direct judgments. 

However far the testing of instruments and the corrections for changes 
of physical factors, such as temperature, are carried, there is always a final 
dependence upon direct intuitions that relevant circumstances are un- 
changed. Instruments are used from minute to minute, from hour to hour, 
and from day to day, with the sole guarantee of antecedent tests and of 
the appearance of invariability of relevant circumstances. 

This 'appearance' is always a perception in the mode of presentational 
immediacy. If such perception be in any sense 'private' in contradistinction 
to a correlative meaning for the term 'public/ then the perceptions, on 
which scientific measurement depends, t merely throw light upon the pri- 
vate psychology of the particular observer, and have no 'public' import. 

Such a conclusion is so obviously inconsistent with our beliefs as to 
the intercommunication of real actualities in a public world, that it may 
be dismissed as a reductio ad absurdum, having regard to the groundwork 
of common experience which is the final test of all science and philosophy. 
A great deal of modern scientific philosophy consists in recurrence to the 
theory of 'privacy' when such statements seem to afford a short cut to 
simplicity of statement, and— on the other hand—of employment of the 
notion of observing a public world when that concept is essential for ex- 
pressing the status of science in common experience. Science is either an 
important statement of systematic theory correlating observations of a 
common world, or is the daydream oi a solitary intelligence with a taste 
for the daydream of publication. But [503] it is not philosophy to vacillate 
from one point of view to the other. 



330 The Theory of Extension 



SECTION V 

Finally, thet meaning of 'congruence' as a relation between two geo- 
metrical elements in a strain-locus must be considered. It will be sufficient 
to consider this meaning in reference to two segments of straight lines, 
and to treat all other meanings as derivative from this. 

A strain-locus is defined by the 'projectors 7 which penetrate any one 
finite region within it. Such a locus is a systematic whole, independently 
of the actualities which may atomize it. In this it is to be distinguished 
from a 'duration* which does depend on its physical content. A strain- 
locus depends merely upon its geometrical content. This geometrical con- 
tent is expressed by any adequate set of 'axioms* from which the systematic 
interconnections t of its included straight lines and points can be deduced. 
This conclusion requires the systematic uniformity of the geometry of a 
strain-locus, but refers to further empirical observation for the discovery 
of the particular character of this uniform system. For example, the ques- 
tion as to whether a complete straight line be a 'closed' serial locus of 
points or an 'open* serial locus, is entirely a question for such discovery. 
The only decision is to be found by comparing the rival theories in re- 
spect to their power of elucidating observed facts. 

The only relevant properties of straight lines are (i) their completeness, 
(ii) their inclusion of points, (iii) their unique definition by any pair of 
included points, (iv) their possibility of mutual intersection in a single 
point. The additional axioms which express the systematic geometrical 
theory must not have reference to length or to congruence. For these no- 
tions are to be derived from the theory. Thus the axioms must have ex- 
clusive reference to the intersection of straight lines, and to their inclusion 
or exclusion of points indicated by the intersections of other lines. Such 
sets of axioms are [504] well known to mathematicians. There are many 
such sets which respectively constitute alternative geometrical theories. 
Also given one set of axioms constituting a definite geometrical theory, 
different sets of axioms can easily be obtained which are equivalent to each 
other in the sense that all the other sets can be deduced from any one of 
them. AH such equivalent sets produce the same geometrical theory. Equiv- 
alent sets have their importance, but not for the present investigation. We 
can therefore neglect them, and different sets of axioms will mean sets of 
axioms which constitute incompatible geometrical theories. 

There are many such sets, with a great variety of peculiar properties. 
There are, however, three such sets which combine a peculiar simplicity 
with a very general conformation to the observed facts. These sets give 
the non-metrical properties of the three geometrical theories respectively 
known to mathematicians as the theory of Elliptic Geometry, of Euclidean 
Geometry, and of Hyperbolic Geometry.* It will serve no purpose to give 
the three sets of axioms. But it is very easy to explain the main point of 



Measurement 331 

difference between the theories, without being led too far from the philo- 
sophical discussion. 

In the first place, a definition of a 'plane' can be given which is com- 
mon to all the three theories. The definition already given in Chapter III 
of this Part will suffice. But an alternative definition can be stated thus: 
If A, B, C be any three non-collinear points, and AB, BC, CA denote the 
three complete straight lines containing,! respectively, A and B, B and C, 
C and A, then the straight lines which respectively intersect both members 
of any pair of these three lines, not both lines at one of the corners A or 
B or C, pass through all the points constituting one plane, and all their 
incident points are incident in the plane. 

Thus a plane is defined to be the locus of all the points incident in at 
least one of such a group of straight lines. The axioms are such that this 
definition is equivalent to [505] the definition in Chapter III. Also the 
axioms secure that any straight line, passing through two points in a plane, 
is itselft wholly incident in that plane. Also it follows from the definition 
of a plane that a line I and a point P, not incident in I, are coplanar. 

The distinction between the three geometrical theories can now be ex- 
plained by the aid of such a triplet, a point P, a line I not passing through 
P, and the plane n in which P and I are both incident. Consider all the 
lines through P and incident in the plane jr.. Then in the Elliptic Geo- 
metrical Theory, all these lines intersect the line I; in the Euclidean Geo- 
metrical Theory, all these lines intersect the line f, with the exception of 
one and only one line— the unique parallel to I through P; in the Hyper- 
bolic Geometrical Theory the lines through P in the plane are divisible 
into two classes, one class consisting of the lines intersecting f, the other 
class consisting of the lines not intersecting I, and each class with an in- 
finite number of members. Then it has been shown by Cayley and von 
Staudt 1 that the congruence of segments and the numerical measures of 
the distances involved are definable. The simplest case is that of Euclidean 
Geometry, In that case the basic fact is that the opposite sides of parallelo- 
grams are equal. A further complication is required to define congruence 
between segments which are not parallel. But it would serve no purpose to 
enter into the detailed solutions of this mathematical problem. 

But the illustration afforded by the particular case of the congruence of 
the opposite sides of parallelograms! enables the general principle under- 
lying the notion of congruence to be explained. Two segments are congru- 
ent when there is a certain analogy between their functions in a systematic 
pattern of straight lines, which includes both of them. 

The definition of this analogy is the definition of con- [5061 gruence in 
terms of non-metrical geometry. It is possible to discover diverse analogies 
which give definitions of congruence which are inconsistent with each 

1 Cf. Cayley's "Sixth Memoir On Quantics," Transactions of the Royal So- 
ciety, 1859; vonf Staudt's Geometrie der Lage, 1847; and Beitrage zur Geom- 
etrie der Lage, 1856. 



332 The Theory of Extension 

other. That definition which enters importantly into the internal consti- 
tutions of the dominating social entities is the important definition for the 
cosmic epoch in question. 

Measurement is now possible throughout the extensive continuum. This 
measurement is a systematic procedure dependent on the dominant so- 
cieties of the cosmic epoch. When one form of measurement has been 
given, alternative forms with assigned mathematical relations to the initial 
form can be defined. One such system is as good as any other, so far as 
mathematical procedure is concerned. The only point to be remembered is 
that each system of 'coordinates' must have its definable relation to the 
analogy which constitutes congruence. 

SECTION VI 

Physical measurement is now possible. The modern procedure, intro- 
duced by Einstein, is a generalization of the method of least action/ It 
consists in considering any continuous line between any two points in 
the spatio-temporal continuum and seeking to express the physical prop- 
erties of the field as an integral along it. The measurements which are 
presupposed are the geometrical measurements constituting the coordi- 
nates of the various points involved. Various physical quantities enter as 
the 'constants' involved in the algebraic functions concerned. These con- 
stants depend on the actual occasions which atomize the extensive con- 
tinuum. The physical properties of the medium are expressed by various 
conditions satisfied by this integral. 

It is usual to term an 'infinitesimal' element of this integral by the name 
of an element of distance. But this name, though satisfactory as a technical 
phraseology, is entirely misleading. There can be no theory of the con- 
gruence of different elements of the path. The notion of coincidence does 
not apply. There is no systematic [507] theory possible, since the so-called 
'infinitesimal* distance depends on the actual entities throughout the en- 
vironment. The only way of expressing such so-called distance is to make 
use of the presupposed geometrical measurements. The mistake arises 
because, unconsciously, the minds of physicists are infected by a presup- 
position which comes down from Aristotle through Kant. Aristotle placed 
'quantity' among his categories, and did not distinguish between extensive 
quantity and intensive quantity. Kant made this distinction, but consid- 
ered both of them as categoreal notions. It follows from Cayley's and von 
Staudt's work (cf. loc. cit.) that extensive quantity is a construct. The 
current physical theory presupposes a comparison of so-called lengths 
among segments without any theory as to the basis on which this com- 
parison is to be made, and in ignoration of the fact that all exact observa- 
tion belongs to the mode of presentational immediacy. Further, the fact is 
neglected that there are no infinitesimals, and that a comparison of finite 
segments is thus required. For this reason, it would be better— so far as 



Measurement 333 

explanation is concerned — to abandon the term 'distance' for this integral, 
and to call it by some such name as 'impetus/ suggestive of its physical 
import. 2 

It is to be noted, however, that the conclusions of this discussion involve 
no objection to the modern treatment of ultimate physical laws in the 
guise of a problem in differential geometry. The integral impetus is an 
extensive quantity, a length/ The differential element of impetus is 
the differential element of systematic length weighted with the individual 
peculiarities of its relevant environment. The whole theory of the physical 
field is the interweaving of the individual peculiarities of actual occasions 
upon the background of systematic geometry. This systematic geometry ex- 
presses the most general 'substantial form' inherited throughout the vast 
cosmic society which \508] constitutes the primary real potentiality condi- 
tioning concrescence. 3 In this doctrine, the organic philosophy is very near 
to the philosophy of Descartes. 

The whole argument can be summarized thus: 

(i) Actual occasions are immovable, so that the doctrine of coincidence 
is nonsense. 

(ii) Extensive quantity is a logical construct, expressing the number of 
congruent units which are (a) non-overlapping, and (b) exhaustive of the 
nexus in question. 

(iii) Congruence is only definable as a certain definite analogy of func- 
tion in a systematic complex which embraces both congruent elements. 

(iv) That all experimental measurement involves ultimate intuitions of 
congruence between earlier and later states of the instruments employed. 

(v) That all exact observation is made by perception in the mode of 
presentational immediacy. 

(vi) That if such perception merely concerns a private psychological 
field, science is the daydream of an individual without any public import. 

(vii) That perception in the mode of presentational immediacy solely 
depends upon the 'withness' of the 'body/ and only exhibits the external 
contemporary world in respect to its systematic geometrical relationship 
to the 'body/ 



2 Cf. my book, The Principle of Relativity, University Press, Cambridge, 1922. 

3 This theory of the derivation of the basic uniformity requisite for congruence, 
and thence for measurement, should be compared with that of two deeply in- 
teresting articles: (i) "The Theory of Relativity and The First Principles of Sci- 
ence/* and (ii) "The Macroscopic Atomic Theory/' Journal of Philosophy , Vol. 
XXV, f by Professor F. S. C. Northrop of Yale. I cannot adjust his doctrine of 
a 'macroscopic atom' to my cosmological outlook. Nor does this norion seem 
necessary if my doctrine of 'microscopic atomic occasions' be accepted. But 
Professor Northrop's theory does seem to be the only alternative if this doctrine 
be abandoned. I regret that the articles did not come under my notice till this 
work had been finally revised for publication. 



