PART V 
FINAL INTERPRETATION 



CHAPTER I 
THE IDEAL OPPOSITES 

SECTION I 

[512] The chief danger to philosophy is narrowness in the selection of 
evidence. This narrowness arises from the idiosyncrasies and timidities of 
particular authors, of particular social groups, of particular schools of 
thought, of particular epochs in the history of civilization. The evidence 
relied upon is arbitrarily biased by the temperaments of individuals, by 
the provincialities of groups, and by the limitations of schemes of thought. 

The evil, resulting from this distortion of evidence, is at its worst in the 
consideration of the topic of the final part of this investigation— ultimate 
ideals. We must commence this topic by an endeavour to state impartially 
the general types of the great ideals which have prevailed at sundry sea- 
sons and places. Our test in the selection,! to be impartial, must be prag- 
matic: the chosen stage of exemplification must be such as to compel at- 
tention, by its own intrinsic interest, or by the intrinsic interest of the 
results which flow from it. For example, the stern self-restraint of the Ro- 
man farmers in the early history of the Republic issued in the great epoch 
of the Roman Empire; and the stern self-restraint of the early Puritans in 
New England issued in the flowering of New England culture. The epoch 
of the Covenanters has had for its issue the deep impression which mod- 
ern civilization owes to Scotland. Neither the Roman farmers, nor the 
American Puritans, nor the Covenanters, can wholly command allegiance. 
Also they differ from each other. But in either case, there is greatness there, 
greatly exemplified. In contrast to this example, we find the flowering time 
of the aesthetic culture of ancient Greece, the Augustan epoch in Rome, 
the Italian Renaissance, the Elizabethan epoch in England, the Restora- 
tion epoch in England, \513) French and Teutonic civilization throughout 
the centuries of the modern world, Modern Paris, and Modern New York. 
Moralists have much to say about some of these societies. Yet, while there 
is any critical judgment in the lives of men, such achievements can never 
be forgotten. In the estimation of either type of these contrasted examples, 
sheer contempt betokens blindness. In each of these instances, there are 
elements which compel admiration. There is a greatness in the lives of 
those who build up religious systems, a greatness in action, in idea and in 
self-subordination, embodied in instance after instance through centuries 
of growth. There is a greatness in the rebels who destroy such systems: 

337 



338 Final Interpretation 

they are the Titans who storm heaven, armed with passionate sincerity. It 
may be that the revolt is the mere assertion by youth of its right to its 
proper brilliance, to that final good of immediate joy. Philosophy may not 
neglect the multifariousness of the world— the fairies dance, and Christ is 
nailed to the cross. 



SECTION II 

There are various contrasted qualities of temperament, which control the 
formation of the mentalities of different epochs. In a previous chapter 
(Part II, Ch. X) attention has already been drawn to the sense of perma- 
nence dominating the invocation 'Abide with Me/ and the sense of flux 
dominating the sequel 'Fast Falls the Eventide/ Ideals fashion themselves 
round these two notions, permanence and flux. In the inescapable flux, 
there is something that abides; in the overwhelming permanence, there is 
an element that escapes into flux. Permanence can be snatched only out of 
flux; and the passing moment can find its adequate intensity only by its 
submission to permanence. Those who would disjoin the two elements 
can find no interpretation of patent facts. 

The four symbolic figures in the Medici chapel in Florence— Michel- 
angelo's masterpieces of statuary, Day [514] and Night, Evening and 
Dawn— exhibit the everlasting elements in the passage of fact. The figures 
stay there, reclining in their recurring sequence, forever showing the es- 
sences in the nature of things. The perfect realization is not merely the 
exemplification of what in abstraction is timeless. It does more: it implants 
timelessness on what in its essence is passing. The perfect moment is fade- 
less in the lapse of time. Time has then lost its character of 'perpetual 
perishing'; it becomes the 'moving image of eternity/ 



SECTION III 

Another contrast is equally essential for the understanding of ideals— the 
contrast between order as the condition for excellence, and order as stifling 
the freshness of living. This contrast is met with in the theory of educa- 
tion. The condition for excellence is a thorough training in technique. 
Sheer skill must pass out of the sphere of conscious exercise, and must 
have assumed the character of unconscious habit. The first, the second, 
and the third condition for high achievement is scholarship, in that en- 
larged sense including knowledge and acquired instinct controlling action. 

The paradox which wrecks so many promising theories of education is 
that the training which produces skill is so very apt to stifle imaginative 
zest. Skill demands repetition, and imaginative zest is tinged with impulse. 
Up to a certain point each gain in skill opens new paths for the imagina- 
tion. But in each individual formal training has its limit of usefulness. Be- 



Ideal Opposites 339 

yond that limit there is degeneration: The lilies of the field toil not, 
neither do they spin/ 

The social history of mankind exhibits great organizations in their al- 
ternating functions of conditions for progress, and of contrivances for 
stunting humanity. The history of the Mediterranean lands, and of west- 
ern Europe, is the history of the blessing and the curset of political or- 
ganizations, of religious organizations, of [SIS] schemes of thought, of so- 
cial agencies for large purposes. The moment of dominance, prayed for, 
worked for, sacrificed for, by generations of the noblest spirits, marks the 
turning point where the blessing passes into the curse. Some new principle 
of refreshment is required. The art of progress is to preserve order amid 
change, and to preserve change amid order. Life refuses to be embalmed 
alive. The more prolonged the halt in some unrelieved system of order, the 
greater the crash of the dead society. 

The same principle is exhibited by the tedium arising from the unre- 
lieved dominance of a fashion in art. Europe, having covered itself with 
treasures of Gothic architecture, entered upon generations of satiation. 
These jaded epochs seem to have lost all sense of that particular form of 
loveliness. It seems as though the last delicacies of feeling require some 
element of novelty to relieve their massive inheritance from bygone sys- 
tem. Order is not sufficient. What is required, is something much more 
complex. It is order entering upon novelty; so that the massiveness of 
order does not degenerate into mere repetition; and so that the novelty 
is always reflected upon a background of system. 

But the two elements must not really be disjoined. It belongs to the 
goodness of the world, that its settled order should deal tenderly with the 
faint discordant light of the dawn of another age. Also order, as it sinks 
into the background before new conditions, has its requirements. The old 
dominance should be transformed into the firm foundations, upon which 
new feelings arise, drawing their intensities from delicacies of contrast be- 
tween system and freshness. In either alternative of excess, whether the 
past be lost, or be dominant, the present is enfeebled. This is only an 
application of Aristotle's doctrine of the 'golden mean/ The lesson of the 
transmutation of causal efficacy into presentational immediacy is that great 
ends are reached by life in the present; life novel and immediate, but 
deriving its richness by its full inheritance from the rightly organized [S16] 
animal body. It is by reason of the body, with its miracle of order, that 
the treasures of the past environment are poured into the living occasion. 
The final percipient route of occasions is perhaps some thread of happen- 
ings wandering in 'empty' space amid the interstices of the brain. It toils 
not, neither does it spin. It receives from the past; it lives in the present. It 
is shaken by its intensities of private feeling, adversion or aversion. In its 
turn, this culmination of bodily life transmits itself as an element of 
novelty throughout the avenues of the body. Its sole use to the body is its 
vivid originality: it is the organ of novelty. 



340 Final Interpretation 

SECTION IV 

The world is thus faced by the paradox that, at least in its higher ac- 
tualities, it craves for novelty and yet is haunted by terror at the loss of the 
past, with its familiarities and its loved ones. It seeks escape from time in 
its character of 'perpetually perishing/ Part of the joy of the new years is 
the hope of the old round of seasons, with their stable facts— of friendship, 
and love, and old association. Yet conjointly with this terror, the present 
as mere unrelieved preservation of the past assumes the character of a 
horror of the past, rejection of it, revolt: 

To die be given, or attain, 
Fierce work it were to do again.* 

Each new epoch enters upon its career by waging unrelenting war upon 
the aesthetic gods of its immediate predecessor. Yet the culminating fact of 
conscious, rational life refuses to conceive itself as a transient enjoyment, 
transiently useful. In the order of the physical world its role is defined by 
its introduction of novelty. But, just as physical feelings are haunted by 
the vague insistence of causality, so the higher intellectual feelings are 
haunted by the vague insistence of another order, where there is no un- 
rest, no travel, no shipwreck: There shall be no more sea/ 

[517] This is the problem which gradually shapes itself as religion 
reaches its higher phases in civilized communities. The most general 
formulation of the religious problem is the question whether the process of 
the temporal world passes into the formation of other actualities, bound 
together in an order in which novelty does not mean loss. 

The ultimate evil in the temporal world is deeper than any specific evil. 
It lies in the fact that the past fades, that time is a 'perpetual perishing/ 
Objectification involves elimination. The present fact has not the past 
fact with it in any full immediacy. The process of time veils the past be- 
low distinctive feeling. There is a unison of becoming among things in 
the present. Why should there not be novelty without loss of this direct 
unison of immediacy among things? In the temporal world, it is the em- 
pirical fact that process entails loss: the past is present under an abstrac- 
tion. But there is no reason, of any ultimate metaphysical generality, why 
this should be the whole story. The nature of evil is that the characters of 
things are mutually obstructive. Thus the depths of life require a process of 
selection. But the selection is elimination as the first step towards another 
temporal order seeking to minimize obstructive modes. Selection is at once 
the measure of evil, and the process of its evasion. It means t discarding 
the element of obstructiveness in fact. No element in fact is ineffectual: 
thus the straggle with evil is a process of building up a mode of utilization 
by the provision of intermediate elements introducing a complex structure 
of harmony. The triviality in some initial reconstruction of order expresses 
the fact that actualities are being produced, which, trivial in their own 



Ideal Opposites 341 

proper character of immediate 'ends/ are proper 'means' for the emergence 
of a world at once lucid, and intrinsically of immediate worth. 

The evil of the world is that those elements which are translucent so far 
as transmission is concerned, in themselves are of slight weight; and that 
those elements [518] with individual weight, by their discord, impose upon 
vivid immediacy the obligation that it fade into night. 'He giveth his be- 
loved—sleep/ 

In our cosmological construction we are, therefore, f left with the final 
opposites, joy and sorrow, good and evil, disjunction and conjunction— 
that is to say, the many in one—flux and permanence, greatness and 
triviality, freedom and necessity, God and the World. In this list, the pairs 
of opposites are in experience with a certain ultimate directness of in- 
tuition, except in the case of the last pair. God and the World introduce 
the note of interpretation. They embody the interpretation of the cos- 
mological problem in terms of a fundamental metaphysical doctrine as to 
the quality of creative origination, namely, conceptual appetition and 
physical realization. This topic constitutes the last chapter of Cosmology. 



344 Final Interpretation 

Thus, when we make a distinction of reason, and con- [522] sider God in 
the abstraction of a primordial actuality, we must ascribe to him neither 
fulness of feeling, nor consciousness. He is the unconditioned actuality of 
conceptual feeling at the base of things; so that, by reason of this pri- 
mordial actuality, there is an order in the relevance of eternal objects to 
the process of creation. His unity of conceptual operations is a free crea- 
tive act, untrammelled by reference to any particular course of things. It 
is deflected neither by love, nor by hatred, for what in fact comes to pass. 
The particularities of the actual world presuppose it; while it merely pre- 
supposes the general metaphysical character of creative advance, of which 
it is the primordial exemplification. The primordial nature of God is the 
acquirement by creativity of a primordial character. 

His conceptual actuality at once exemplifies and establishes the cate- 
goreal conditions. The conceptual feelings, which compose his primordial 
nature, exemplify in their subjective forms their mutual sensitivity and 
their subjective unity of subjective aim. These subjective forms are valua- 
tions determining the relative relevance of eternal objects for each occa- 
sion of actuality. 

He is the lure for feeling, the eternal urge of desire. His particular 
relevance to each creative act,f as it arises from its own conditioned stand- 
point in the world, constitutes him the initial 'object of desire' establish- 
ing the initial phase of each subjective aim. A quotation from Aristotle's 
Metaphysics 1 expresses some analogies to, and some differences from, this 
line of thought: 

And since that which is moved and moves f is intermediate, there is 
something! which moves without being moved, being eternal, sub- 
stance, and actuality. And the object of desire and the object of thought 
move in this way; they move without being moved. The primary objects 
of desire and of thoughts are the same. For the apparent good is the 
object of appetite, and the real good is the primary object of rational 
wish.f But desire is conse- [523] quent on opinion rather than opinion 
on desire; for the thinking is the starting-point. And thought is moved 
by the object of thought, and one of the two columns t of op- 
posites is in itself the object of thought; . . . 
Aristotle had not made the distinction between conceptual feelings and 
the intellectual feelings which alone involve consciousness. But if 'con- 
ceptual feeling/ with its subjective form of valuation, be substituted for 
'thought/ 'thinking/ and 'opinion/ in the above quotation, the agreement 
is exact. 

SECTION III 

There is another side to the nature of God which cannot be omitted. 
Throughout this exposition of the philosophy of organism we have been 

1 Metaphysics 1072a 23-32, t trans, by Professor W. D. Ross. My attention 
was called to the appositeness of this particular quotation by Mr. F. J. Carson. 



346 Final Interpretation 

In it there is no loss, no obstruction. The world is felt in a unison of im- 
mediacy. The property of combining creative advance with [525} the re- 
tention of mutual immediacy is what in the previous section is meant by 
the term 'everlasting/ 

The wisdom of subjective aim prehends every actuality for what it can be 
in such a perfected system— its sufferings, its sorrows, its failures, its tri- 
umphs, its immediacies of joy— woven by Tightness of feeling into the har- 
mony of the universal feeling, which is always immediate, always many, 
always one, always with novel advance, moving onward and never perish- 
ing. The revolts of destructive evil, purely self-regarding, are dismissed into 
their triviality of merely individual facts; and yet the good they did achieve 
in individual joy, in individual sorrow, in the introduction of needed con- 
trast, is yet saved by its relation to the completed whole. The image— and 
it is but an image— the image under which this operative growth of God's 
nature is best conceived, is that of a tender care that nothing be lost. 

The consequent nature of God is his judgment on the world. He saves 
the world as it passes into the immediacy of his own life. It is the judgment 
of a tenderness which loses nothing that can be saved. It is also the judg- 
ment of a wisdom which uses what in the temporal world is mere wreckage. 

Another image which is also required to understand his consequent na- 
turet is that of his infinite patience. The universe includes a threefold 
creative act composed of (i) the one infinite conceptual realization, (ii) 
the multiple solidarity of free physical realizations in the temporal world, 
(iii) the ultimate unity of the multiplicity of actual fact with the pri- 
mordial conceptual fact. If we conceive the first term and the last term in 
their unity over against the intermediate multiple freedom of physical 
realizations in the temporal world, we conceive of the patience of God, 
tenderly saving the turmoil of the intermediate world by the completion of 
his own nature. The sheer force of things lies in the intermediate physical 
process: this is the energy of physical production, God's r61e is not the 
combat of productive force [526] with productive force, of destructive 
force with destructive force; it lies in the patient operation of the over- 
powering rationality of his conceptual harmonization. He does not create 
the world, he saves it: or, more accurately, he is the poet of the world, with 
tender patience leading** it by his vision of truth, beauty, and goodness. 

SECTION V 

The vicious separation of the flux from the permanence leads to the 
concept of an entirely static God, with eminent reality, in relation to an 
entirely fluent world, with deficient reality. But if the opposites, static and 
fluent, have once been so explained as separately to characterize diverse 
actualities, the interplay between the thing which is static and the things 
which are fluent involves contradiction at every step in its explanation. 
Such philosophies must include the notion of 'illusion' as a fundamental 



348 Final Interpretation 

mary can [528] only be expressed in terms of a group of antitheses, whose 
apparent self-contradictions depend f on neglect of the diverse categories of 
existence. In each antithesis there is a shift of meaning which converts the 
opposition into a contrast. 

It is as true to say that God is permanent and the World fluent, as that 
the World is permanent and God is fluent. 

It is as true to say that God is one and the World many, as that the 
World is one and God many. 

It is as true to say that, in comparison with the World, God is actual 
eminently, as that, in comparison with God, the World is actual eminently. 

It is as true to say that the World is immanent in God, as that God is 
immanent in the World. 

It is as true to say that God transcends the World, as that the World 
transcends God. 

It is as true to say that God creates the World, as that the World 
creates God. 

God and the World are the contrasted opposites in terms of which 
Creativity achieves its supreme task of transforming disjoined multiplicity, 
with its diversities in opposition, into concrescent unity, with its diver- 
sities in contrast. In each actuality theref are two concrescent poles of 
realization— 'enjoyment' and 'appetition/ that is, the 'physical' and the 
'conceptual.' For God the conceptual is prior to the physical, for the 
World the physical poles are prior to the conceptual poles. 

A physical pole is in its own nature exclusive, bounded by contradiction: 
a conceptual pole is in its own nature all-embracing, unbounded by con- 
tradiction. The former derives its share of infinity from the infinity of ap- 
petition; the latter derives its share of limitation from the exclusiveness of 
enjoyment. Thus, by reason of his priority of appetition, there can be but 
one primordial nature for God: and, by reason of their priority of enjoy- 
ment, there must be one history of many actualities in the physical world. 

[529] God and the World stand over against each other, expressing the 
final metaphysical truth that appetitive vision and physical enjoyment have 
equal claim to priority in creation. But no two actualities can be torn 
apart: each is all in all. Thus each temporal occasion embodies God, and 
is embodied in God. In God's nature, permanence is primordial and flux 
is derivative from the World: in the World's nature, flux is primordial and 
permanence is derivative from God. Also the World's nature is a pri- 
mordial datum for God; and God's nature is a primordial datum for the 
World. Creation achieves the reconciliation of permanence and flux when 
it has reached its final term which is everlastingness— the Apotheosis of 
the World. 

Opposed elements stand to each other in mutual requirement. In their 
unity, they inhibit or contrast. God and the World stand to each other in 
this opposed requirement. God is the infinite ground of all mentality, the 
unity of vision seeking physical multiplicity. The World is the multiplicity 



350 Final Interpretation 

existence. The function of being a means is not disjoined from the func- 
tion of being an end. The sense of worth beyond itself is immediately 
enjoyed as an overpowering element in the individual self-attainment. It 
is in this way that the immediacy of sorrow and pain is transformed into 
an element of triumph. This is the notion of redemption through suffer- 
ingf which haunts the world. It is the generalization of its very minor 
exemplification as the aesthetic value of discords in art. 

Thus the universe is to be conceived as attaining the active self-expres- 
sion of its own variety of opposites— of its own freedom and its own 
necessity, of its own multiplicity and its own unity, of its own imperfection 
and its own perfection. All the 'opposites' are elements in the nature of 
things, and are incorrigibly there. The concept of 'God' is the way in 
which we understand this incredible fact— that what cannot be, yet is. 

SECTION VII 

Thus the consequent nature of God is composed of a multiplicity of 
elements with individual self-realization. It is just as much a multiplicity 
as it is a unity; it is just as much one immediate fact as it is an unresting 
advance beyond itself. Thus the actuality of God must also be understood 
as a multiplicity of actual components in process of creation. This is God 
in his function of the kingdom of heaven. 

Each actuality in the temporal world has its reception into God's na- 
ture. The corresponding element in God's nature is not temporal ac- 
tuality, but is the transmutation of that temporal actuality into a living, 
ever-present fact. An enduring personality in the temporal world is a route 
of occasions in which the successors with some peculiar completeness sum 
up their predecessors. The correlate fact in God's nature is an even more 
complete unity of life in a chain of elements for which succession does not 
mean loss of immediate unison. This element in God's nature inherits 
from the temporal counterpart [532] according to the same principle as in 
the temporal world the future inherits from the past. Thus in the sense in 
which the present occasion is the person now, and yet with his own past, 
so the counterpart in God is that person in God. 

But the principle of universal relativity is not to be stopped at the con- 
sequent nature of God. This nature itself passes into the temporal world 
according to its gradation of relevance to the various concrescent occasions. 
There are thus four creative phases in which the universe accomplishes its 
actuality. There is first the phase of conceptual origination, deficient in 
actuality, but infinite in its adjustment of valuation. Secondly, there is the 
temporal phase of physical origination, with its multiplicity of actualities. 
In this phase full actuality is attained; but there is deficiency in the soli- 
darity of individuals with each other. This phase derives its determinate 
conditions from the first phase. Thirdly, there is the phase of perfected 
actuality, in which the many are one everlastingly, without the qualifica- 



356 

